
The two men, taking comfortable positions on the reef, had lit their
pipes. Hour after hour they sat smoking, interchanging a few words,
but always with their eyes alive for changes in the water below. Now
forgetting to smoke, they lay on their elbows looking down into the
green depth where, stronger through the shallowing water, sharper,
clearer, the ship began to shew her form hideous to the sight as the
form of a man bloated by disease; grey, enormous, muffled with coral,
tufted with what seemed fungous growths.

“Look,” said Yves, pointing down to where the fantastically high poop
was humping itself into view, “saw you ever a ship built in that
fashion floating on the sea? Why she is from the time of Noah—In the
church at Paimpol they have a model ship like that; she was dedicated
to the Virgin in the old days—”

“Let us look,” growled the Moco, speaking as if irritated by the voice
of his companion; then he hung silent, his eyes fixed on the vision
developing below. The tide had sunk now to within a foot of low water
mark, and as the veil of water lessened so did the vision strengthen;
one could make out the decks clearly, all rough with coral, and the
coral banks that were once the bulwarks, a stump of mainmast was left
and had become converted into a cone of coral the height of a man;
trace of mizzen mast there was none.




CHAPTER III

EVENING


All this time, steadily as the tide, the sun had been sinking; he had
dropped through a dazzling azure sky and he was now hanging almost in
touch with the western horizon, a ball of fire in a sky of dazzling
gold; momently the gold of the sunset took possession of the sky,
spreading up, up, till the very zenith was reached, and down, down,
till the gilding reached the eastern sky line. The world now seemed
clipped in the cup of a great golden flower, and the little ripples
that came sighing in round the low tide reefs showed their foam like
fleeces of gold. Not a trace of cloud shewed in the golden sky, not a
wave on the golden sea; in that wonderful sunset the palm tops burned
like fingers of flame, and as music lights the soul of man, so did the
golden and glowing atmosphere the heart of the lagoon.

The ship in the water below answered to the magic of the light;
the thing that had been grey and dismal as death was in a moment
transformed to a dream of colour, the brains of frost-white coral
became golden lamps; starfish, sea-flowers, coraline growths, pink,
crimson, indigo, pale yellow, colour and form, all lent their adornment.

Shadowless on her bed of dazzling sand she hung for a moment, burning
in full sight, clear to the eye as though she were floating in air and
exquisite as a jewel, then just as she had bloomed she faded out, her
colour and beauty passing with the fading light, and as night swept
over the sea like the shadow of a violet-wing, she vanished utterly,
whilst the lagoon filled with darkness and the first stars cast their
shimmer on its surface.

“_Eh bien?_” said Yves, as he rose to his feet and stretched himself.
The Moco, who had also risen to his feet, looked around him at the
world of darkness that had displaced the world of gold; he had seen
many things, but nothing that had ever struck his imagination so
vividly as the sight now veiled by darkness. His mind could not reason
on the question or refute by logic the feeling in his heart that what
he had seen was evil.

All that gaiety and colour decking the ruin of man’s work was like
laughter coming from under the seas.

Yves felt nothing of this.

“Come,” said the Moco, turning towards the shore, “let’s go back.”

As they tramped their way through the brushwood they talked of the
thing they had seen. Yves thought that from the height of her poop she
must be very old, or it might be that it was only a very big deck-house
snowed over with coral; he slapped his thigh as he walked, pleased with
the idea of the snow; when a boy in Brittany he had seen things heaped
with snow and bulked out in size, carts, barrels, and so forth, just as
the old ship was heaped and bulked out with coral; but the simile was
lost on Gaspard; you do not get snow at Montpellier to any extent; also
his mind more trained by early education, and more supple by heredity,
refused to draw images from gross bulk; the colours appealed to him;
“_mordieu_,” said he, “she reminds me most of a ship of flowers I once
saw drawn along in the carnival procession at Montpellier.”

“Flowers,” laughed Yves, “where would you get flowers under the sea?”
The stupidity of Yves roused Gaspard’s ever-ready anger.

“From the devil, maybe—I was not talking of flowers under the sea; I
was talking of what I had seen in Montpellier.”

They had reached the southern beach, where the palm trees grew, and
Yves set about lighting a fire of dry brushwood; when it was burning he
heaped on some wreck-wood; the ship of coral, the wreck of the _Rhone_,
their position, all were banished from his mind by the business in hand.

When supper was finished they sat each with his back against a palm
tree. The work of the day was over. They had rigged up a rough sort of
tent with the boat sail and some broken spars, but the warm night held
them in the open.

The red light of the fire lit the white sand to within a few yards
of the sea edge, where the waves were falling gently, rhythmically,
drowsily, Haassh—Haassh—Haassh—a chill and dreamy sound. Above, the
sky solid with stars, voiceless, windless, seemed a thing more alive
and active than the sea. From the slight elevation where they sat a
ghostly white streak on the starlit sea to the southward indicated the
reef that had slain the _Rhone_; only at low tide and half way between
flood and ebb tide did the snow of the surf indicate the position of
the murderer.

“She had a lot of gold in her for Havana,” said Yves, breaking silence
and nodding in the direction of the reef; “seems a pity that it should
be lying there under the sea and no one to spend it.”

“See here,” said Gaspard, “it’s strange I was thinking of that hooker
lying in the lagoon over there.”

“Yes?”

“I was thinking, maybe, there is stuff worth looking for a’board her if
one could get at it.”

Yves laughed.

“Yes, if you could get at it—if you could get at it—and she built
over with coral a foot thick; and if you could break through it what
would you find? dead men’s bones. It’s like your flowers under the
sea.” He tapped the dottle out of his pipe, rose, stretched, and
turned toward the little tent, whilst Gaspard without a word continued
smoking; he could have struck Yves.

The son of a tradesman in Montpellier, he possessed still some
rudiments of the education he had received before that fatal day when,
driven by the instinct of wandering and the hatred of restraint, he had
run away to sea. Yves, the son of long generations of sailors, had gone
to sea as a duckling goes to the pond. Gaspard had been taken there by
his imagination. He knew himself superior to the lumbering Yves whose
fingers were like fish-hooks, who had the manners of a bear and the
walk of a walrus, yet Yves was always proving himself (by chance, no
doubt) the better and the luckier man.

He turned in under the shelter of the tent where Yves was already
snoring, and he slept and dreamt of the docks of Marseilles, of
Anisette, and of Yves.




CHAPTER IV

SPANISH GOLD


From the salt-white sand of the beach to eastward, and some two hundred
yards from the palm-clump a ridge of coral rocks ran out into the sea
like a natural pier. The water lay deep off these rocks and the fishing
would have been good had the ship-wrecked ones possessed lines and
hooks.

Gaspard, next day, late in the afternoon was standing at the end of
this coral pier, the sea of an incredible blue, sailless, forlorn,
came glassing shoreward in long gentle lines of swell, slobbering and
sighing by the rocks and breaking sadly on the sands.

When the sea comes in like this in long spaced undulations a voice
steals through her voice, the something tragic, the _quid obscurum_
that hides in nature and speaks through the elements and the passions
is heard. The sea has a hundred voices, Gaiety, Triumph, Strength,
Sadness, Regret, the wave speaks them all. But stand on a day like this
on a desolate island in the tropics and listen to the voice that steals
from all that splendour of light and gaiety of colour, the violent
heaving wastes of water, the triumphant sun, the sky of living blue,
through all these, from all these you will hear a voice, it is borne by
the languid voice of the sea.

It is the voice of Loneliness.

Loneliness—Fate, Death, Tragedy—all these are dwarfed before her,
to escape from whom the very atoms of matter cling together, animals
join in herds, men in communities. She who says to man “I walk by
you from the cradle to the grave, with me you go forth from the world
alone, because of me you work out your fate alone, by the shores and
desolate plains of the north I shew my face, by the tropic sea men hear
my voice. I am she who makes Death terrible. I am she who makes Love
beautiful. Love my only enemy.”

Gaspard, standing on the reef, heard the voice, his eyes were fixed on
the green water in the shadow of the rocks, an albicore like a flashing
sword had passed a moment ago, now there was nothing to be seen but
the crystalline vagueness through which here and there floated a scrap
of fucus. Just in that second, held between the sound of the sea and
the mesmeric crystal of the water his mind heard Loneliness speak.
Just in that moment was borne in on him dimly, and without awakening
true comprehension, the tragic fact of human isolation, the fact that
each man is on a desert island set round by the sea of life, and that
there alone he must work out his fate, unless from some island in the
distance Love should bring him help.

The fact came to him as a sensation rather than a thought, the grave
harmonics of the sea had whispered to him this eternal truth, the fact
which is the master fact of life.

Suddenly, from behind, as he stood there gazing into the depths came
a voice that made him turn. Yves far away amidst the low bushes was
beckoning and calling to him, capering, gesticulating, flinging his
arms about. Yves seemed to have gone mad, and Gaspard, making along the
rocks, ran across the sand, and through the bushes towards him.

Over the bushes the air was shaking with the heat, Yves was much
farther off than he had seemed from the rocks; he was almost at the
centre of the islet, and now as Gaspard made his way through the bushes
he saw that his companion held something in his hand.

“Hurry up, lazy bones,” cried Yves, “and see what I have found.” He
waved the thing in the air, it was a belt with a brass buckle and a
pouch attached to it. He was laughing, one might have fancied that he
had fallen on some great, good fortune.

He had.

“Look,” cried Yves. He opened the pouch, it was filled with big pieces
of gold; they had been wrapped in oilskin, he had flung the oilskin
away and he stood with his two great hands outspread clasping the pouch
and the treasure bursting from it.

Gaspard at the sight gave a cry that rang across the islet and was
answered by the ever-wheeling gulls.

“Gold!” cried Gaspard, seizing a piece from the hand of Yves. He
examined it, bit it, glanced at it again. He seemed dazed and had the
look of a man who, long a prisoner in darkness, had been suddenly
brought face to face with a powerful light. The piece of gold was
Spanish, a piece of eight, heavy, and stamped with the stately effigies
of a vanished king.

“Look!” cried Yves, taking the coin back from the hand of Gaspard and
replacing it in the pouch with the others. “Look!” As he buckled the
pouch he pointed with his foot at something amidst the bushes. Just
here the bushes were thinner than elsewhere and here the ground was
raised in a little mound. Amidst the bushes, white and desolate, lay
some bones. They were strewn hither and thither. One might have fancied
that here once lay a skeleton, the embers of a man that some wind had
blown upon and scattered. A skeleton, in fact, had once lain here,
on or amongst the bushes, but so long ago that the bushes dying and
growing again had cast the fragments apart. The skeleton of a man; the
skull which Gaspard had picked up and was now holding in his hand told
that.

It was a strange skull, small and deformed, hideously broad across the
cheek-bones; the bones of the thigh easily distinguished by even the
untrained eyes of the sailors were unequal in length, the shorter of
them had been injured or broken, for it shewed the thickening where
callus had formed.

“Pah!” cried Gaspard, flinging the skull down. “He must have been a
beauty whoever he was—and look.” He picked up an old pistol-barrel,
eaten away by rust, the trigger plate thin as a leaf and crumbling like
a withered leaf to the touch lay near. Many, many years of exposure it
must have taken to eat the metal away like that. Yves glanced at the
thing without interest. “Come,” said he, and turning, he led the way to
the southern beach. Here under the palm trees he sat down, opened the
pouch, and rattled the gold pieces on the sand between his outspread
legs.

Gaspard, who had followed him without a word, stood, without a word,
looking on.

Yves counted the pieces; there were twenty-one of them and he was
disappointed; there had seemed more. He began to recount them. He had
scarcely done so when Gaspard broke silence.

“Look here,” said Gaspard, “half of that falls to my share; half of
that belongs to me by all rights.”

Yves stopped his counting and looked up. It was the tone of Gaspard’s
voice rather than his words, perhaps, that caused the expression upon
his broad, sun-burnt face. A heavy, unfriendly expression, such as the
face of a croupier might wear when some punter disputes the game.

“Yours?” said Yves, “and who found them?”

“That’s neither here nor there,” said the Moco, “you found them, it is
true, but it was only a question of luck. I might have found them just
as easily, and if I had I would have gone shares.”

Yves knew this to be a fact. Gaspard was the soul of generosity.
Generosity was not predominant in the soul of Yves. He was a
good-hearted man, but the Breton peasant was uppermost in his nature;
he had made this great haul of golden fish entirely with his own hand,
and now he was called upon by a man more generous than himself to share
it.

He said nothing for a moment, but went on counting the pieces; then,
as if addressing them, “Yes, it’s easy to talk of luck—but would I
have found them if I had been lying lazy on the beach, or staring into
the sea like some people? No, I was hunting for dead brushwood, doing
something for my living, and I found them.”

“Then keep them,” cried Gaspard, and turning on his heel he walked down
to the sea edge. He walked for a bit along the sand, then, with his
arms folded, he stood looking at the sea.

His mind had left the subject of the money and was clinging to the true
grievance he had against Yves. The poisonous source of hatred. Anisette.

But the grievance of the money was there as well, and all at once by
some alchemy of Satan the hundred grudges petty and large that he
had against his companion joined together and formed the figure of a
monstrous Yves, a creature he hated, and who, so the devil whispered,
hated him.

The sun was now near its setting, and as Gaspard stood there with arms
folded looking at the sea, the eternal crying of the gulls took on a
new meaning; they were saying a new word:

“Yves,—Yves,—Yves.”

It seemed as though the very gulls were mocking him.

“Yves,—Yves,—Yves.”

He turned and strode up the sand to where Yves was sitting beneath the
palm trees.

The sun was sinking now over Tampico way in a sky of living gold, the
western sea, leaping to meet him, flashed his splendour to the very
shores of the islet; each flake of foam seemed a flake of primrose
light and the sands stretched like sands of gold by the shores of the
golden sea.

Gaspard came right up to Yves, the splendour of the sunset on his face,
his hands clenched in his pockets, his lips dry.

“All the same,” said Gaspard, as though he were continuing a
conversation, “you are a thief, and a son of a thief—more fool I to
chum with a dog of a Ponantaise.”

Yves rose up; he was a slow man to wrath, but terrible when roused.
The belt and the pouch containing the money were lying at his feet; he
kicked them aside as he faced the Moco.

“You say—”

“I say what I have said.”

“After the fashion of the monkeys,” replied Yves, “that say what they
have said all day long—_drop that!_”

The Moco had whipped the knife from the sheath in his belt. Both men
wore knives, but the Ponantaise had not drawn his. He stood with his
arms folded across his immense chest, literally as though he were
nursing his wrath.

“It is well known,” said Yves, his eye on the knife, “that a Moco and a
woman can only fight with their claws and tongue.”

Gaspard dropped the knife; then he stooped and picked it up as if to
replace it in his belt; he seemed half mad with rage and not to know
what he was doing.

That was the moment of his life; the next he might have replaced the
knife in its sheath and all would have been well, had not Yves, whose
anger had suddenly passed from his control, spat at the Moco a word.

A word of one syllable, one of those dead rats of language that these
men fling at one another in jest, but when spoken in anger are worse
than a blow.

The Moco flung himself back as though a snake had struck at him, then
the knife in his hand flashed through the air and Yves was on his back
on the sand kicking and coughing and whistling at the sky.

The knife had just touched the jugular vein in his neck; the air
rushing into the vein made the whistling noise, but Gaspard knew
nothing of this. He strode up to the body of his companion with fists
clenched, prepared for battle, and certain that his antagonist would
spring to his feet and face him.

Then he saw that Yves was dying. Dying of nothing, apparently, for the
knife was on the sand almost unstained and the stricken man shewed no
wound to speak of, just a scratch on the neck from which the black
blood oozed in froth.

Had Gaspard raised his eyes to the west he would have seen that the
great sun was now cut in half by the sea, dying in a scene of splendour
indescribable, but he saw nothing, nothing, but the face of Yves.

For a moment he stood, the last fiery rays of the sun casting his
shadow far away along the sand. Then he was kneeling by the body,
shaking it by the arm, calling upon it to wake up—to come to life!




CHAPTER V

AMIDST THE BUSHES


After the first outburst of raving, impetuous grief, the grief of a
child rather than the grief of a man, Gaspard rose up from where he had
cast himself down by Yves. The sun had long passed from the sky and the
star-smitten sea came in smoothly, rhythmically, breaking in foam on
the starlit sands, and there on the sand lay Yves, listening to what
the sea was saying.

His great right fist, clenched, was lying on his breast; one might
have fancied that the meaning of it all and the mystery of that sky
so filled with fire and passionate life, and those wastes of the
ever-fretting sea, had been revealed to him in one stupendous moment,
that he had struck himself on the breast in the stupefaction of wonder
that he was gazing and listening, motionless before the revelation
forevermore.

Yves from a common man had become at once and at a stroke a part of
the immensity and the wonder of the night, the reachless stars and the
fathomless sea; and, for a moment, Gaspard, standing before the body of
the man he had slain, saw death as the prehistoric man saw it before
language had robbed thought of its freshness and power. For a moment
only, and then the stars became the stars again, and the sea the sea,
and the dead body of Yves the body of a man he had slain in anger.

And now that his southern nature had spent itself in a wild outburst
of grief just as a child spends itself in an outburst of weeping,
thought came back.

Well, then?—whose fault was it?

The knife was flung with no intent to kill,—what right had he to die
of a scratch like that?—and then the vile word—that was the last of a
long series of injuries. And bit by bit his mind went back counting up
the score of these “injuries,” right back to the tobacco-smelling bar
of the Riga and to Anisette as he had last seen her, with her little
grimy hand resting on the great hairy paw of Yves. That remembrance
like a hideous lamp lit up all his grievances, enlarging them two-fold.
No, he was not to blame; he had not meant to kill, and if he had, _Dieu
de Dieu_, look at the provocation!

He stood for a moment, his chin resting in his hand, his eyes on the
body before him; then he turned and, walking down to the sea-edge,
dipped his hands and washed his face in the foam. As he turned up the
beach again towards the trees, wiping his streaming face with the
sleeve of his coat, he felt as though all the occurrences of the last
few hours had happened years ago, so remote did they seem for the
moment. The sight of the body lying there so still in the starlight
brought him to a pause. Grief rushed back on him, driving all little
and evil things from his mind. He stood looking at his handiwork.
It had been an accident; he had not meant to kill; he did not even
remember flinging the knife. The act had been automatic and committed
in blind rage—all the same, he had killed Yves.

Then, loathing the business which had to be done, he seized the body of
his dead companion by the shoulders and began to drag it towards the
bushes.

       *       *       *       *       *

As he stepped from the bushes, his task accomplished, he cast his eyes
over the beach. It lay white in the starlight, and there was nothing
now to tell of tragedy but the knife lying there just as it had fallen
after its murderous work. He picked it up, dug it in the sand, and
replaced it in its sheath. The belt with the pouch of money lay under
the trees; he picked it up automatically and, carrying it in his hand,
turned to the little tent.

As he walked towards the tent two heavy hands seemed pressing down on
his shoulders; unutterable weariness had suddenly fallen upon him,
robbing him of mind and almost of movement, so that when he reached the
tent he was staggering like a drunken man.

He crept under the shelter of the tent, and with the belt and the money
beside him fell into a profound and dreamless sleep.




CHAPTER VI

ALONE


When he awoke it was full day and the sands beyond the tent opening lay
white and blazing in the sunlight down to the blue, lazy sea.

He remembered everything at once. It would almost have seemed that his
mind behind the veil of sleep had been reasoning the matter out, for he
had awakened saying to himself out loud, and as if he were continuing
a conversation, “Yes—and what is more, I saved his life.” He crawled
from the tent and stood erect beneath the palms. The morning, warm,
sweet, and sunlit, lay around him; the sapphire sky and flashing sea;
snow-white gulls and snow-white sands. A hot, gentle wind was stirring
the palm fronds. He collected some dry brushwood for the fire, lit it,
and piled on some wood from the wreck. When it was alight, flickering
a hundred red tongues at the sun and staining the blue air with smoke,
Gaspard was brought to his first pause. Of what use was the fire? He
was no good as a cook. Yves had been the cook; he had cooked crabs,
tinned meat, and what-not, using an old tin for a billy; he was born
for that sort of work and could do anything practical he turned his
hand to.

Yves had always done the cooking whilst Gaspard had looked on. This
fact struck Gaspard for the first time now. It was as though the dead
Yves was still proclaiming his superiority. Yves had salved most of
the stores, Yves had hunted for dead brushwood, Yves had found crabs,
Yves had found the spring of water, Yves had found the boat sail, Yves
had built the tent, Yves had found the ship of coral in the lagoon,
Yves had found the gold. Yves had done everything since their landing,
and he, Gaspard, had done nothing but smoke and dream.

Far from being a waster, he had, still, left everything to the big
blond man so full of energy and resource and the joy of life; the
southern laziness had held possession of him. All the same, Yves had
proved himself the better man and was proving the fact now, voiceless
and dead amidst the bushes as he was.

Gaspard kicked the fire to pieces and flung sand on the embers; then he
breakfasted on some ship’s biscuit and some tinned meat, lit his pipe
and strolled down to the sea-edge.

It was eight o’clock and the gasping warm wind came in over the morning
sea, the lazy, deep blue sea, so infinite, so beautiful, so desolate.

He stood, and, shading his eyes, he swept the horizon—not a trace of
sail or smoke could he see. The sky, of a burning emerald just above
the sea-line, swept up into the burning blue, and from sea and sky,
like the breath from a great blue mouth, came the warm wind. It felt
like a woman’s hot fingers playing with his hair, like a woman’s warm
arm cast round his neck.

From the southeast with the wind, now loud, now low, came the crying of
the gulls. Though he had heard them since awakening, he had not noticed
them till now; he turned his eyes to where they were wheeling and
flying spirit-white in the blue.

It was at this moment that Loneliness seized his heart. The fact of his
utter isolation had not stood before him full square till just now.
The gulls were explaining it to him.

“You are alone!—alone!—alone! Hi!—Hi!—Hi!—you there on the sands
alone!—alone!—alone!—we have nothing to do with you—we are nothing
to you—alone there on the sands—all day long and night and day, and
night and day, who will you speak to—what will you do? You there on
the sands alone!—alone!—alone!”

He drew his sleeve across his brow to wipe away the sweat that had
suddenly started tingling through his skin; then he cast his eyes again
over the sailless blue of the sea and, turning, came back to the tent.
When he reached it the terror left him, fell from him suddenly like a
dropped cloak. He cursed himself for his stupidity and, though his pipe
was not half exhausted, he tapped the tobacco out, re-filled and lit
it. It was something to do. Then, to drive the thought of Yves away, he
fell to imagining what sort of a ship would take him off the island,
and then he stretched his hand into the tent and pulled out the belt
and pouch of money. On the brass buckle of the belt, all green with
verdigris, there was something scratched. He cleaned the brass with
sand—it was something to do—and made out what seemed the initials
“S. S.” He pondered on these for a while and then, opening the pouch,
he turned the contents on to the sand.

Though he knew the number of coins, he counted them again and again—it
was something to do. Then he began to spend them in fancy, the
remembrance of the tragedy of yesterday always standing like a ghost
behind his thoughts and trying to obtrude itself.

This occupation lasted him an hour, and he was brought back from it
suddenly by a tug at his heart. It was still morning; the awful day
had scarcely progressed; the mantle of Loneliness had fallen on him
again; the gulls were still crying, calling, wheeling, rising, falling,
fishing mechanically and seeming part of a tireless mechanism fretting
the speechless blue of the sky.

He put the coins back in the pouch and flung belt and pouch into the
tent; then he rose to his feet and made towards the bushes.

On the sand still lay a mark as though a heavy sack had been dragged
along it towards the bushes.

He avoided the pointing of the sinister path and struck across the
islet, crushing the brushwood under foot. He had no object other than
to get away from the place where he was, to keep in motion—to be doing
something. The heat lay heavy over the bay cedars, the air was shaking
blanket-fashion under the fiery rays of the sun, the bushes were dense,
yet in a trice it seemed to him he had reached the northern beach. The
islet seemed to have led him across it to explain its smallness, and
as he stepped on to the beach a new sensation caught him in its grip.
The sensation of being ringed in, enclosed in a small circle from which
there is no escape.

Yet there were no bars, and around him on every hand stretched infinity.

He came along the reef forming the edge of the lagoon; the tide was
beginning to flood and the foretop of the ship was standing stark and
dry from the water; the ship herself was clearly to be seen, in this
light even more clearly than in the sunset glow. But the picture was
far less beautiful.

Grey and dead she seemed, lying there in the diamond-clear emerald of
the water, but the lagoon this morning was gay with fish, parrot-fish,
gropers, flights of coloured arrows, sapphire, ruby and emerald-tinted
ghosts.

The swell of the incoming tide came slobbering over the reef; shutting
one’s eyes one might have fancied a giant shuddering and catching his
breath and sobbing to himself.

Gaspard stood for a long time watching the moving life of the lagoon,
absorbed, as a child might be before the contents of an aquarium.
He had forgotten Loneliness for a moment, but she had not forgotten
him. As he stood with his eyes fixed on a large fish, sapphire and
mist-grey, that had developed like a spirit and was now hanging
motionless with moving gills above the ship, casting a vague shadow
upon the coral-crusted deck; as he stood watching it, the breeze
strengthened, stirring his hair, and on the breeze a voice hailed him,
far away and weary.

“Hi! Hi! Hi!—you there on the reef. Hi! Hi! Hi!—you there
alone!—alone!—alone!—see how the wind takes us, wheeling, fishing,
forever—alone—alone—alone.”

He turned his face to where, across the islet, far away in the blue,
the gulls’ white wings were winking and beckoning to him; their voices,
thinned by distance, had a desolation rendered even more desolate by
the gorgeour of the burning blue sky, the triumphant sunlight, the
licking of the warm weak wind.

There is no desolation so terrible as the desolation that lies
in summer warmth and blue skies. Here life ought to have been
superabundant, but here there was no life or moving thing save the wind
and the gulls and the waves.

“God!” said the Moco. He thrust his clenched fist in his pocket and,
turning from the lagoon, made his way along the rocks to the shore.

He returned to the south of the islet, not through the bushes, but
along the eastern sea-edge where the reefs were like rows of teeth and
the rock edges like razors. Here it was that most of the wreckage of
the _Rhone_ had come ashore, and here there was still wreckage enough,
in all truth. Here was something to do.

In a moment he was up to his knees in water. The _Rhone_, when the
explosion of the boilers rent her asunder, had cast wreckage enough
upon the water, but even still, as she lay beneath the surface, sinking
more and more completely to ruin, things were breaking loose from her
and rising as bubbles rise from a submerged body, and drifting ashore
with the tide. Hencoops, boxes, spars, barrels, were pounding about in
the surf. Heavy spars were here, all chawn and frayed by the reefs; the
coral teeth had left their marks on everything; there was nothing worth
salving, yet Gaspard worked like a dock labourer, hauling upon spars,
heaving at barrels, forgetting Loneliness in the exertion of manual
labour.

But she was there, and her voice forever speaking, subtle, like a music
interpenetrating all things from the sound of the wave to the silence
of the sky, made itself heard again.

As the power of friction brings a machine to a pause, so did this
voice, which was a part of the sunlight, a part of the silence, a part
of the blueness of sea and sky, bring Gaspard to a stand.

He wiped his brow and looked at the heap of things he had collected.
He remembered how Yves had laboured at the same job, and now, for the
first time since the tragedy, as he stood looking at the heap of spars
and wreckwood, a feeling of pity came to his heart for the man lying
there dead amidst the bay-cedar bushes.

The outburst of grief to which he had given way on the evening before
was, to speak truth, an outpouring of his southern nature; anger
suddenly checked and flung back by Death, inverted and bursting forth
furiously at the sight of the irreparable result of his anger.

But this feeling of pity for Yves came from the depths of his soul, for
it was born of pity for himself.

It was fatal for this feeling to enter his heart just now, for the
heart, softening towards the dead, opened the door for superstition to
enter.

He thought of the tent over there beneath the palms and how pleasant it
would be if, on his return, he were to find Yves sitting by the tent.
Then, with a chill of horror, came the idea—how awful it would be if
on his return he were to find Yves sitting by the tent! His imaginative
mind played with this idea for a moment and then cast it hurriedly
away. He laughed out loud to reassure himself, and the steady wash of
the sea made answer and the distant gulls. Then, leaving the salvage
bleaching in the burning sunlight, he came towards the southern beach.

No; there was nobody by the tent, but the wind was playing with a
loose corner of the sail-cloth, flapping it about. The tent seemed
beckoning to him as he came towards it across the white, blazing
sands. Everything—every sound, every gesture of animate or inanimate
nature, was beginning to have a deep and extraordinary significance
for Gaspard. The silence, the sunlight, and the blueness had first
conspired to shew him his loneliness; the gulls had insisted on it,
gloated over it, explained it; but now, since over there by the
wreckwood the pity for Yves and his fate had entered into his heart,
the gulls, the silence, the sunlight, and the blueness were speaking
a language less assured. “Are you alone? Hi! you there on the sands,
what’s that beckoning to you? Hi! Hi! The wind flaps the tent? Ha! ha!
Hi!”—and then silence for a moment, and then, weak, weary, querulous,
from the circling white spirits away there in the smoky blue of
midday—“Yves—Yves—Yves.”

The very poetry of Loneliness, Distance, Blueness, Regret—fatal regret.

Gaspard fastened up the flap, and the wind, as if vexed at being robbed
of its plaything, shook the palm fronds, and then some of the finest
of the sand on the beach gathered itself up into a little sand devil
and danced away on the wind. An unseen hand seemed moving everywhere
fitfully, now here, now there, touching the sand, touching the trees,
touching the bay-cedar bushes. Gaspard, as he lay with his head in the
shade of the tent resting after his exertion, listened to the faint
patter of the palm fronds and the whisper of the sand; sometimes the
sail-cloth of the tent would lift a bit to the wind.

It was only the wind, yet it moved like a living thing. Sometimes he
imagined a hand lifting the tent-cloth back and a voice saying, “Hullo!
what are you doing here?” He imagined Yves as the possessor of the
voice, and he drove the imagination from his mind.

Never for a moment did he feel fear of the body lying away there amidst
the bushes; not for the worth of the _Rhone_ would he have gone through
the bushes to look at it and see how it was faring at the hands of
corruption, yet he felt no fear of it; on the contrary, it was the
thing he dwelt on when he wished to allay fear. For fear, faint and
indefinable, was taking hold upon him now. He had no compunction about
the part he had played in the death of Yves. The thing was an accident,
so he told himself; all the same, men who die suddenly and violently
have a habit of haunting the place where they die.

You can run from a haunted house, but you cannot run from a haunted
island. This dread of no escape was what formed the true basis of his
fear, a thing on which to build terrible and fantastic edifices. He
lit a pipe and, smoking it, he fell asleep, awakening in an hour or so
refreshed and fearless. Sleep seemed to have wiped away Loneliness,
superstition, and all their attendant evils. He felt hungry, and
getting some tinned meat and biscuit from the store of provisions which
lay close to the trees he dined after a fashion, and then lit a pipe.

It was now half-past three, the gulls had ceased crying and afternoon
lay on the island like a hot, heavy hand. So still seemed everything
that one might have fancied the islet wrapped in idyllic peace; but it
was the peace that broods over fermentation. The air over the sands was
shaking in waves and a faint hum of insect life came from the bushes. A
torrid and tremendous pyramid of light stood upon nature, crushing her
to silence yet unable to stifle her faint fret and murmur.

At four o’clock Gaspard was standing at the end of the little pier of
coral reef just at the place where he had been standing yesterday, when
Yves’ voice had called him to see the treasure. There were no fish
visible in the water to-day, nothing floated there but an occasional
scrap of seaweed. The clear water, bright as a diamond and green as an
emerald, held the gaze with the fascination that lies in a globe of
crystal. Out here at the end of the projecting spur of reef, with the
sea on either side, one felt as though one were standing on the deck of
a boat.

It was pleasant out here with the sea coming in gently around the
rocks, leaving scarcely a trace of foam, scarcely a trace of sound;
the islet was singing to the little waves, but the reef only gurgled,
slobbered slightly when a higher ridge of swell lapped the more exposed
portions, and sighed as the water sinking exposed the weeds, the
clinging shells, and the coralline growths.

Gaspard, standing, looking into the green depths, mesmerized by their
crystal clearness and thinking of nothing, was suddenly brought to
consciousness by the feeling that someone was standing close behind
him. He wheeled round. Nothing. The reef, the islet, sea and sky were
destitute of life, yet distinctly he had felt as though someone were
standing behind him, almost in touch with him, almost breathing upon
his neck; and he felt that if he had turned more sharply he would have
caught sight of the viewless one; and the reef, the islet, sea and sky,
had for a moment a simpering look, as though they had succeeded in the
trick of snatching the Unseen One away before he could be glimpsed.

The absurdity of this idea destroyed it almost as soon as it was born.
He shook the sensation off with a little shiver and, casting his eyes
over the sea-line again as if in search for a ship, he began to walk
along the reef back to the shore.

He was stepping from the reef on to the sand, when upon the sand he saw
something that brought his breathing to a stop. The imprint of a naked
foot.

It was a foot-mark left by Yves, and there was nothing supernatural
about it at all; it had been left on the previous day, and it was still
sharp and clear, for a ledge of the reef had protected it from the wind
and the blowing sand; but to Gaspard it was more terrible than the
naked face of Death.

He walked away from the terrible thing with his hand clutching at his
heart, his eyes cast from side to side, not daring to look back. He did
not know where he was going, but his feet led him to the palm clump.

Here he sat down with his back to a tree bole. The terror was behind
him and the tree seemed to fend it off. The tree was a living thing;
all at once it had stepped out of the semi-inanimate world where trees
dwell and flowers, and had become a living personality. In his supreme
terror he could have turned and embraced it, but he was afraid for a
moment to move from his position, just as a man is afraid to move who,
attacked by enemies, has his back to a wall.

Such terror does not last in its entirety for more than a brief space
of time. Reason came to his assistance. He remembered that Yves had
been by the reef end on the day before. The foot-mark was a real thing.
No ghost could have left it.

He was telling himself this when,

“Hi! Hi! Hi!”

Loud, shrill, heart-snatching came a hail right from behind him. It was
the voice of Yves, and springing to his feet with a scream, Gaspard,
clinging to the tree-bole, looked.

A great black man-o’-war bird with bright eyes and coral-red beak was
passing over the islet and hailing it as it passed.

Tremendous, definite, and strong against the blue, yet more soundless
in flight than an arrow, it passed overhead without a motion of the
wings.

As it passed it hailed the island once again, and once again from far
out at sea, motionless, but fast dwindling till it became a faint speck
and was lost in the blue to southward.

Gaspard, breathing freely again, watched the great bird losing itself
in nothingness, lifting veil after veil of sky, and horizon after
horizon of sea, bound for some port of call in the Windwards or beyond.

The shock had been better than medicine to him, shewing him his own
superstition and the stupidity of his alarm. The island seemed suddenly
freed from the haunting presence; he began to doubt himself. If a bird
could make a fool of him like that, he must be a fool indeed.

A year seemed to have passed since sunrise and the sun was now dropping
to the sea, bringing to its end that vast blue day so filled with
loneliness and the terrors of the unknown.




CHAPTER VII

THE BOAT


Most of us have never known the day as it is and the night as it is.
Protected from the wind and the sunlight by walls and houses, by
artificial light from the darkness, by words from the truth, we have
created an artificial world in the midst of the true world. In the
wind, in the sunlight, in the sea, there are voices speaking a language
long forgotten; lost when thought, becoming vocal, set up a language of
its own and a tower of Babel in the world of dreams. Even still, when
alone in the solitudes, on the moors, on the mountains, by the sea,
through all the claptrap of language and thought come the voices; the
true, eternal voices that were before we were and will be when we are
not.

Voices of which all art, in marble, in tone, or in words, is but the
pathetic imitation, an echo dulled and muffled and debased. In this
lies the eternal despair of art.

To the mind of the commonest man, if he be imaginative, the language
of the eternal things is louder far than to the mind of the most
cultivated man if he be only imitative.

Gaspard’s mind was of the imaginative order. Up to this, in the
forecastle or stokehold, on board ship or on shore, he had been held
apart by his fellows or protected by the common things from the eternal
truths. Loneliness in her extremest form had brought him in touch with
them; or at least within whispering distance.

The great blue day, dying now, had searched his heart and mind; it
was as though the old gods of nature had landed on the island and
stood around him viewless and perplexing him with whispers. Fear, Air,
Distance, Light, and Sea had spoken to him in turn and in chorus;
Loneliness had echoed what they said.

There was something more in the wind and the sun and the sky and the
sea than he had known of up to this; the drinking-bar, the forecastle,
the sailors’ lodging-house, those black holes had hidden him from this
knowledge; a debased language in which the word “sea” stood for wharves
and ships, stokeholds and furnaces, decks and glimpses of ocean had
paralysed his thought and numbed it. Twelve hours of loneliness and
fear, face to face with nature, had loosened the old false labels from
the truths of things and, without a glimpse of the real truths, a dim
recognition of the falsities unsettled his mind.

The damning mesmerism of language had suspended itself partly for a
moment in this partly unsophisticated mind, and as he sat watching
the sun sink in the western sea, the word “sunset” or the word “sea”
never occurred to him. He was thinking without language, lost in
contemplation, like an animal viewing from a distance a new and curious
but undisturbing phenomenon.

And the sight was tremendous as ten million cubic leagues of golden air
could make it. Fire, Light, and Distance were there at this marriage
of sun and ocean; colour, size, limit, all were banished from the
infinite, indefinite universe of gold through which the golden sun was
sinking to the golden sea.

The sun had almost reached the sea-line and for a moment Ocean and
Sun hung apart, the splendour of the sea answering the splendour of
the sky. For a moment time seemed to cease and silence supreme,
everlasting, golden, and beautiful, held the West in her keeping.

A moment—and then, flashing, palpitating, leaping like a woman under a
burning kiss, the great sea flung her arms up to her lover.

Destroying him utterly and almost in a moment, washing him away,
melting him as though he who had been fire had become wax and the wax
had been cast into a cauldron of boiling gold. Then, as if millions
of infinitely tenuous golden veils were being stripped away with the
rapidity of thought, bluer and bluer, darker and darker, appeared the
night behind them.

A hand seemed sprinkling and spraying the sky with stars.

One could scarcely say, “It is night,” before night had taken
possession of the world and the night-wind was blowing in the palms.

Gaspard, rising, stretched himself and then crept under the shelter of
the tent; the opiate of the sea air and his weariness brought sleep at
once, profound, dreamless sleep which lasted till just before dawn.

He was awakened by a sound.

Someone close to the tent had, so it seemed to him, struck a single
blow on a drum. He raised himself on his arm; sleep had fallen from him
like a cloak, and his mind was alert again, and alive to fear.

He listened, but heard nothing except the weary washing sound of the
waves on the beach.

Then, as he listened, it came again, but from a distance. Boom! A
monstrous sound in that desolate place, alarming and uncanny as the
sound of a trumpet.

If it were a drum note, then, judging by the sound, the drum must be of
Gargantuan size.

With the sweat running from his face he crept out from under the tent
and stood beneath the trees.

Nothing. The new moon had risen and was floating like a little silver
boat amidst the stars; the starlight flooded the sea and brimmed over
on to the foam. So solid was the sky with stars that the palm fronds
cut their silhouettes on it sharply and distinctly. Never was there a
more lovely southern night.

As he stood and listened, again, from very far away this time, came the
sound.

Boom! As though the drummer had stridden away leagues across the sea to
beat his drum around the world before dawn.

Had Gaspard known these waters the sound would have had less terror
for him. It was the sound of great devil-fish, sea-bats that rise from
the water, quiver for a moment in the air, and then fall, smashing the
waves to foam, with a noise that reverberates for miles. But he knew
nothing of the sea-bats, and he stood pursuing in his mind the drummer
who had beaten this strange _réveil_ and with his eyes fixed on the
horizon to eastward where the sky was stained by the dawn.

It came, killing the stars, clear and cold in tint, beneath a sky
shifting in colour from smoke-grey to aquamarine and icy blue. Then
it bloomed into warmth and kindness of tone. Just as children hold
buttercups to one another’s faces to see the yellow reflection, so
one might suppose some hand beneath the horizon was holding a vast
buttercup to the dawn’s pallid face.

A thread of living gold stole along the sea-line, became a fiery,
moving caterpillar, and, at a stroke, the last stars were washed away,
dissolving in blueness and infinite distance, the sun was peeping
across the water and then suddenly, as though he had taken a leap
elbow-high and elbow resting on the sea-line, he leaned forward and
struck the world in the face with his great golden hand.

Had you been watching Gaspard, as he stood with the dawn wind blowing
his hair, you would have seen the stroke of the sun’s hand on his face,
on the palms behind him, on the sea before him, suddenly given as a
blow.

The same hand was striking the Bahamas, and in a hundred blue harbours
from Cape Sable to Port of Spain ships’ topmasts were catching the
light. Martinique, Guadeloupe, Grenada, peak, morne, and valley, were
already flaming to it like green torches in the dawn wind. Key West
would be stricken in a moment and the gulf to Galveston and Tampico be
turned from a lake of stars to a living sapphire, the Caribbean would
leap alive from Grand Cayman to Darien, from San Juan to La Guaira,
alive and burning and blue. The wind that was blowing in Gaspard’s
face, a wind that came over the blue and laughter of the morning sea
like a wind from the golden age and the youth of the world, held
freshness for the orange groves and the gardens of all these Western
islands where the night jessamines were closing, the night insects
ceasing their songs, and the fireflies preparing to put out their lamps.

Gaspard knew nothing of that tremendous poem in colour which the dawn
shows to God each time she lifts the darkness from the tropics; just
now he did not even see the sunrise and its splendour, he had, for a
moment, forgotten even his fears; his eyes were fixed on an object
about a mile away to the southeast, something round and black that
bobbed in the sparkle and glitter of the water.

It was like the head of a swimmer, and now it was like a drifting buoy.
It was drawing nearer, the current was setting it towards the island,
and now—it was like a boat.

It was a boat!

There could be no mistake; it underwent alterations of shape as it
twisted to the slap of the waves, now head on for the island, now
nearly broadside on.

A boat—release from the islet and its dreams and terrors! The cry that
escaped from Gaspard seemed echoed by the gulls.

He made for the pier of coral reef, running along the sand to it,
forgetful of everything, never glancing at the place where the
footsteps of Yves had been, scrambling over the coral till he reached
the extreme end, where, surrounded by the morning sea, and the wind,
and the light, he shaded his eyes and watched.

The boat was now plainly in view dancing on the waves with the
lightness of a walnut shell on the ripple of a pond. It was empty and
drifting towards the islet, but it would not touch the beach, it would
pass by a few hundred yards; he saw that, and he prepared for the event
by casting off his clothes.

It seemed a small boat midway between a dinghy and a ship’s
quarterboat, and never to Gaspard’s eyes had anything appeared so gay
in motion or so friendly as this tiny craft dancing upon the waves.

At a distance it had seemed black, but now he saw that it was painted
white; it was clinker built, for, so clear was the air, he could see
the overlapping planks, and now as he stood preparing to take to the
water and swim to it, the terror of the islet which he had shaken off
for a moment came behind him again, and at once held him back and urged
him forward.

What if the Terror followed him into the sea? Behind him there seemed
a deadly enemy filled with wrath at his attempt to escape, and, for
a moment, the want of power that comes to us in nightmare held him
shivering in the wind, the next he was in the sea, striking out for the
boat.

He had to swim against the current that was carrying it, the waves hit
him in the face like wet hands trying to drive him back; but the shock
of the plunge had given him his courage.

The boat was close now, beautiful and buoyant, and white as a gull,
smacking the sea as she came, shining with spray, the green water under
her showing clear as an emerald. Now, she was only an arm’s length
away, and now, he was grasping the starboard thwart. She heeled over
slightly as he got his elbow on the thwart and peeped in. She was empty
of everything but the bottom boards and a pair of sculls, clean scoured
with spray; a dead flying-fish was lying washing about in the few
inches of water she had shipped; it was newly dead and had struck her
only perhaps an hour ago.

He worked his way round to the stern, boarded her and stood upright.

He was free of the island at last, but he would have to land to get his
clothes and some provisions and water.




CHAPTER VIII

THE ESCAPE


He stood for a moment balancing himself, his eyes sweeping the sky-line
to southward, which shewed neither sail nor stain of smoke, and as he
stood he heard the island calling to him.

“Hi! Hi! Hi! you there in the boat! come back! come back! Hi! Think you
to escape us? Ha! ha!—hi! Fishing, wheeling, calling, O the weariness,
the blueness, the waves, the wind, the sun; they are ours and they are
yours, forever—forever—forever. Hi!”

Through the voices of the gulls came the monotonous tune of the beach
across the bright morning sea. The tent flap had got loose again and
was beckoning. Come what might, provisions and water must be taken on
board and the clothes he had left on the reef spar recovered.

He felt like a man who had just escaped from a haunted house, yet he
had to go back. To land again on that terrible spot and leave the boat
whilst he hunted for the things was an act requiring real courage, but
it had to be done.

He got the sculls out and, rowing towards the strand, beached the boat
cleverly. There was no danger in leaving her, as the tide was ebbing;
the only danger was in delay, for if the water receded too far, he
would not be able to get her afloat again till high tide.

Jumping out knee-deep, he hauled her nose a little higher on the sand,
then, running like a man pursued, he made for the tent, seized the
belt and the pouch of money, made for the heap of provisions, seized
a bag of biscuits and some tinned stuff, and with his arms filled
returned to the boat.

It was a nightmare business, for the vague fears of yesterday had
become more definite, as though the near chance of escape had given
them life. He felt Yves behind him as he ran, sweating as he ran,
from the boat to the store of provisions and back to the boat. An
empty water-breaker from the _Rhone_ lay near the tent. This had to be
filled; the spring was amidst the bushes, yet he made his way there,
crushing the brushwood under his naked feet, his breath coming in
bursts, his lips dry as sandstone. Yves had not caught him yet, as,
the breaker on his shoulder, he came running back to the boat. He
flung it in; the clothes, now, had to be fetched, the worst part of
the business, for it was fifty yards down the beach to the ridge of
reef and the clothes were at the extremity of the reef. But it had to
be done, and he ran, sweating yet shivering, worked up to the wildest
pitch of excitement, by the sea edge to the shore end of the reef.

He was without his boots,—he had forgotten that,—and the reef was
sharp and rough; there were edges like knives that had to be avoided,
drive Fear as she might. This was the place where Yves had first stood
behind him in imagination, and it was here, now, that the pursuing
terror was most acute.

At last, bleeding, panting, with shaking hands, he reached the clothes.
He put on the boots and with the coat, shirt, and trousers under his
left arm, came back swiftly along the reef, sprang on to the sand, and,
running, shouting, gesticulating with his free arm, made for the boat.

He was shouting at the boat; she was there safe enough and in full
sight; yet viewless hands seemed preparing to push her off; she would
be gone before he reached her, the island would never let him escape.

When he reached her he brought his open hand bang down on the gunwale
as if to make sure she was really there, flung in the clothes and then
tried to push her off.

The tide had ebbed more quickly than he had imagined. She was firm on
the sand. It was a two men’s business to float her and he never would
have done it, had he been alone; but he was not alone. Fear was with
him.

The boat gave to his efforts, shifting slightly, then more and more,
till she moved stem and stern to the lifting waves and was afloat.

He tumbled into her and she came broadside on to the strand; but the
waves were less than two feet high and with one of the sculls he
managed to pole her out, then, seizing both sculls, he rowed.

He was free of the island at last; sculls and current were sweeping
him from it into the wastes of the blue sea; the water, all merry with
the breeze, smacked the boat cheerily and flashed away and away, in
the level sunlight to where the palms were waving, and the foam was
breaking, and the sea gulls calling.

“Come back!—come back!—you are leaving us, but our voices are
following you. Go far as you may, our voices will follow you, our
weariness, the sunlight, the blueness shall be yours forever—you there
in the boat alone, where is Yves—Yves—Yves?”

Then, more far away, the last word, the last echo from the island,

“Yves—Yves—Yves.”

Now, there was nothing but the passing of the wind, the sound of the
sculls, and the warbling of the water. There were no waves here, the
shallows and the reefs had made the sea choppy close to the island;
here there was nothing but a heave of the sea, long lapses of swell,
infinitely blue, breeze-strewn and sun-dazzled.




CHAPTER IX

A STAR ON THE SEA


The island had passed away, painted out by distance; the sky above the
horizon, paled by the indigo of the sea, lay like a ring of sparkling
emerald; to southward, where the emerald passed into the living burning
sapphire of the sky, lay a line of white clouds, swan-white and like
a flock of flying swans, darkening with their suggestion of snow the
blueness of the water, deepening with their remoteness the distance.

The warm wind blew steadily sparkling up the blue, the incredible blue
of the sea; the scull-blades, immersed half a foot in the water, were
tinted with azure, the floating scraps of seaweed were tinted with
indigo; a man floating a yard deep would have shewn like a form of
lazulite.

Gaspard had drawn in his sculls; free of the island now, what use was
there in rowing? He had no idea of direction, North, South, East or
West. His only chance, so he told himself, lay in his sighting a ship.
He was in the hands of chance and he did not feel afraid. Not only
that, but he felt in his mind a certainty that before long he would be
rescued.

The relief of his escape from the island may have had something to do
with this intuitive optimism, and the fact that he had provisions and
water enough to last him for days. Loneliness had vanished; he had left
her behind on the island, she and Yves.

It seemed like a bad dream, all that, and Yves was the worst part of
it. He felt neither sorrow nor compunction for what had happened. Why
should he? He had not meant to kill, and if he had meant to kill, would
he not have been justified? He felt nothing of remorse, nothing of that
pity for the dead man which had come to him yesterday, when, standing
by the reefs on the eastward of the island, he had looked at the heap
of raffle he had salved. He had suffered too much since then to have
any sentimental feelings on the matter. Haunted and bedevilled, he had
escaped with his reason more by luck than anything else.

He dressed himself and then he sat, rocked by the swell, drifting,
the sun rising higher towards the zenith, the wind blowing steadily
out of the southeast, warm as a woman’s breath. Every now and then a
flying-fish like a silver arrowhead would leave the sea, flash through
the air, and vanish.

Towards noon a shoal of them chased by some enemy broke the water to
starboard; one passed right over the boat, soundless in flight, swift,
brilliant against the blue, with staring sightless eyes; a phantom from
the deep pursued by a phantom, definite for a moment and hard to the
sight as a jewel, gone like a ghost the moment after, made one again
with the blue sea.

The wind tempered the heat of the sun, long strips of seaweed floated
past lazily, and a turtle that had been sunning itself basking on the
water’s surface, slipped away and vanished as the boat drew near. A
great gull came along drifting on the wind, passed with the silence of
a moving cloud and dwindled to nothingness in the blue to northward.

Nothing in the world of water and sky seemed to move with effort, a
profound languor filled it all from the depths below to the heights
above, from the little boat whispering and chuckling on the ripples to
the distances of the horizon; distances that shewed nothing, told of
nothing but summer, vagueness, and azure.

Two hours before sunset Gaspard standing up to get a better horizon and
shading his eyes with his hand saw, away on the eastern sea line, a
bright point burning like a star.




CHAPTER X

LIKE A THIEF IN THE NIGHT


It was a sail.

He stood with his eyes still shaded, motionless but for the movement of
the boat.

From away out there a hand seemed to have reached clutching at his
heart. The star so steadfast and so still held him by its very
stillness and steadfastness. There, where the sunlight showed that
motionless point of light were crowded decks, bending spars, snoring
sails, life, motion; a ship breasting her way through the blue sea,
heeling to the breeze.

All that was there. Here, nothing but a star marking poignantly the
vacancy of illimitable distance. The wind had freshened, it was as
though the ship had sent the joyous breath of life before her, the
breezed-up water smacked the boat merrily, and even as he looked the
star grew, lifting steadily as the mainsails joined the topsails above
the sea line.

As Gaspard watched, his confidence and assurance left him. The blind
trust in chance that had possessed him all day vanished now that chance
had shewn her hand.

At once and vividly his true position stood before him, and the
horrible chances of death that lay in it, and, so strange a thing is
mind, now and for the first time did the sense of his own wealth in the
possession of these twenty-one big pieces of gold take possession of
him. Side by side with the fear of not being rescued stood the vision
of the possibilities that lay in them. Each one weighed as much as
three twenty-franc pieces. Six hundred and three francs; with that what
might he not do! It was the only big bit of luck that had ever fallen
in his way, and it would be doubly bitter to die with his luck in his
hands.

And, still, as he watched, the sail grew. The vessel was not nearly
so far off as she appeared; for the boat gave a low horizon. For this
reason, too, she seemed bigger than she really was. That she was
heading straight for the boat he could not doubt, yet he stood torn by
the fear that she would miss him, pass him by, not sight him.

His imaginative mind saw her passing, saw her fading away, saw himself
standing and calling after her and cursing her; so vivid was the
obsession that for a moment, as he drew the picture, blazing wrath shot
up in his heart towards her captain, curses rose to his lips, and sweat
started on his brow.

Then he wiped his face with his coat sleeve, and unable to remain in
idleness a moment longer, took the sculls and headed the boat for the
point from which the vessel was approaching.

Useless, the moment his back was turned on the sail it was gone from
his mind as from his sight. He had to keep it in view and shifting his
position with the sculls half drawn in, he sat watching.

He had not so good an horizon sitting as standing, yet the sail had
sensibly increased in size even allowing for the altered elevation.

With a dip of the sculls he kept the boat so that he was always
facing the approaching vision, and sitting thus the picture before
him resolved itself into three components: the after part of the
boat, white, clean-scoured by spray, and burning in the sun with the
exception of the space covered by his shadow; the blue of sea and sky;
the ship.

Seated, with the sculls ready to correct the boat when she twisted to
the wind and the current, his eyes passed from the boat to the far-off
ship, from the ship to the sea and sky.

And still she grew, as a child grows in the womb, as an idea in the
mind, adding member to member, significance to significance. He could
see now the fore topsail distinct from the fore course. She was a
square rigged vessel as to the fore part, but coming as she was, the
spread of fore and topsails screened her rig.

She had altered, too, in colour; the frost white star was now a
truncated pyramid of pale but brilliant rose, around which the deep
blue heart of the sky paled to emerald by contrast.

And still she grew, motionless, or seeming not to move, yet becoming
more definite, expanding as a bud expands, voiceless, and like a vision
developing in a dream.

Moment joined itself to moment, minute to minute. She might now be ten
miles away, or maybe more, her course would bring her directly to the
boat and she would sight it to a certainty _if she had light_.

It was his own shadow cast by the oblique rays of the sun on seat and
bottom board and thwart that suggested the chilling clause.

The sun was little more than an hour from his setting; would he cut the
sea line before the vessel sighted the boat?

It was a race between the sun and the ship. He knew quite well that
though she was coming apparently dead on to him, the chances were that
she might pass him by a considerable distance, and, as though the
thought had cast a blight on her, for a long time she hung, not seeming
to alter in size. Then magically, she took distinctness, mystery and
beauty left her; in a short half hour she became clearly defined, a
small vessel of perhaps two hundred tons, at a distance of perhaps five
miles. She would not be doing more than eight or nine knots.

Gaspard looked behind him at the sun. It had outraced the ship, there
were still diameters between it and the horizon, but the western blue
was just beginning to turn, to tinge with vague orange, as though an
impalpable mist of gold dust were rising from the sea.

But now the ship, as a runner strains when near the goal, seemed
straining to reach him. Moment by moment she leapt nearer, and the old
stained sails that had lost the vague rose of distance caught now the
first touch of gold from the sunset.

The eastern sky still held its blue, and against it the ship burned
like a ship of gold, and before her prow the water divided like
glittering silk cut by a golden sword.

Scarcely a mile away she leapt more triumphantly into life, she seemed
within hail; standing up and stripping off his coat Gaspard waved it,
shouting against the wind, delirious, forgetful of distance, forgetful
of the sun and then—just as though a bad wizard had touched her she
began to lose her brilliancy; she had seemed springing towards him with
golden arms outspread, triumphant, and seeking to save him and then,
just as though indifference had suddenly seized her, she seemed to lose
her speed.

He turned his head. God! the sun was gone, just a trace of fire
lingered beneath the gold of the sunset, through which, like a dark
blue wind, was stealing the night.

       *       *       *       *       *

The vessel from a ship had turned to a phantom lost in a world of
violent shadow. With the passing of the sun the breeze fell away
to a gentle breathing of air. Then, in that moment of darkness and
indecision, before the stars have taken full possession of the sky,
standing up and straining his eyes he could not see the ship at all.

Ah! here she came at last, stealing along in the starlight with sails
just filling and, then, more clearly to view as ten million stars lit
the sea, turning it to frosted silver.

At four knots without a light showing, softly and seeming the very
embodiment of treachery and evasion she came. She would pass by some
five cable lengths to starboard and Gaspard, seizing the sculls turned
the boat’s head to cut her off.

As he rowed he shouted, and had anyone on board heard him they might
have fancied it, so thin and hard was his voice, the crying of a sea
gull, but from all appearances no one heard him, for not a light shewed.

Now she bulked up enormous, a great trapezium of ebony cutting the
silver sky; he ceased rowing, shouted again, and paused to listen. So
close was she that he could hear the wash of the water at her fore
foot, the creaking of blocks and the slatting of the scarcely filled
sails.

Scarcely a cable length away and making to pass him by half that
distance she came, black as ebony, a barquentine, silent as a phantom,
stealthy as a thief. Then, as he hailed her again with a last
despairing cry, she burst into voice.




CHAPTER XI

CAPTAIN SAGESSE


A lantern shot its light over the port quarter, a voice hailed him from
the deck:

“Hi yi ow!” shrill as a bird, and at the cry, like a shaken beehive,
the forecastle broke into life; the decks in a moment were a-swarm,
chattering like a tree full of monkeys, another lantern shewed over the
port bow, and above the lantern a face black as the face of a devil
with glittering eyeballs and white teeth grinned down on the boat below.

Next moment something struck Gaspard across the chest, it was a rope;
seizing it he held on, and the little boat came up grinding against the
great washing wall of the vessel, carried with her on her slow way and
right beneath the broad channel of the foremast. He seized the rope’s
end to the forward seat, caught up the belt with the pouch of gold
and fastened it to his waist; then, reaching up, he caught hold of a
channelplate and with the help of another rope flung by the chattering
crowd above, swung himself on to the channel. Next moment he was on
deck.

The starlight lit the decks dimly fore and aft, he was surrounded with
negroes swarming and chattering like monkeys; a man in a panama hat
who had helped him over the side, and who, disregarding him, was now
shouting directions in shrill French to a black man who had slipped
down into the boat, seemed the only white man on board.

Having finished his directions he turned, kicked a negro who stood in
his way, caught up a lantern, and coming up to Gaspard held the light
to him as if he were a work of art he wished to examine.

“French?” said the man in the panama, speaking in that language and
fixing Gaspard with a pair of beady unwinking black eyes. His face lit
up by the lantern-light was round, good-tempered looking, the face of
a _bon bourgeois_—yet the eyes chilled Gaspard for a moment ere he
replied:

“Yes, French, shipwrecked and floating about in that cursed boat till
you nearly ran me down.”

“What ship?”

“The _Rhone_ of the _Compagnie Transatlantique_.”

“The _Rhone_; I have seen her in Havana harbour, is she lost then?”

“Yes, ripped her bottom out on a reef and gone with all on board.”

“You are the only one saved?”

“Yes.”

“_Boufre_!” said the other, betraying his _provence_ in the word. “A
Moco, too, so was I till I became a man of my own. Well I have saved
you, and _I take the boat_! I am Captain Sagesse, and this is my barque
_La Belle Arlésienne_.”

He seized Gaspard by the coat lapel as he brought the words out with
emphasis.

“The boat is mine, you understand.”

“Oh the boat, she is yours and welcome.”

“She is worth five hundred francs, and a brush full of white paint
will take the _Rhone’s_ name off her. I found you on a raft—no, on a
hencoop—no, on a spar—” he slipped his arm through Gaspard’s and was
leading him aft to the deck-house on the poop. “You were floating on a
spar. Here is the deck-house. Come in.” He opened the deck-house door
disclosing a cabin comfortably, yet roughly furnished. A table stood
in the middle, over the table hung a swinging lamp. Two doors opening
aft gave entrance to the captain and mate’s cabins, tiny holes not much
bigger than dog-kennels. The captain flung his panama on the table and
Gaspard took a seat, and looked at his companion who was now opening a
locker, and fetching out a bottle of rum and some glasses and a basket
of ship biscuits. This roundfaced and contented looking personage had,
in the first moment of their acquaintance, invented and asked him to
assist in a microscopic felony. He placed his hand on the bag of gold
at his side as, leaning on the table, he replied:

“But, see here, that boat doesn’t belong to the _Rhone_ at all.”

The man in the panama had placed the things on the table, he turned.

“But you said—”

“Yes, but you have not heard all; I was wrecked from the _Rhone_ right
enough, on a spar too, away on an island down there, then the boat came
floating along, she has no name on her that I have seen, I got into her
and rowed away—that’s all.”

“_Outre_,” said Sagesse, pouring out two glasses of rum, whilst
Gaspard took a biscuit. The little man almost seemed disappointed; one
might have fancied that he regretted the lost chance of “doing” the
_Compagnie Transatlantique_ out of a boat, then he took a Martinique
cigar from his pocket, lit it, and with his elbows on the table began
to talk and ask questions.

He asked questions without waiting for an answer, nay, he sometimes
answered them himself, as—

“The _Rhone_, I have seen her in Havana harbour, what tonnage was she?
Oh, I know, seven thousand; she and the _Roxelane_ were sister ships.
The _Roxelane_ called regularly at St. Pierre. Oh, yes, I ought to know
her, Martinique bred as I am. Not born, mind you. No, I was born at
Arles, but I have spent thirty years in these seas. One can make money
in these seas, but one never can forget the old land, and you were
born at Montpellier, you say, ’tis the same thing, and all Provençals
are brothers. Think you, if I picked up a Dutchlander or an English,
or even a Ponantaise, I would be giving him rum in my cabin—” Then
mellowed by the rum and the presence of another Provençal, he leaned
his elbows further on the table and continued talking and asking
questions without seeming to hear the answer.




CHAPTER XII

RUM


He had done big things, had Captain Sagesse, since the day thirty
years and more ago when, deserting from a French ship, he had taken
up his abode at St. Pierre. Beginning at the very bottom, he had
worked his way up to comparative affluence, and whilst plying Gaspard
with questions he interpolated fragments of his own history. Captain
Sagesse was the only subject of very deep interest to Captain Sagesse;
had he been going to his own execution he would have cast fragments
of his history to the crowd, he was a walking autobiography, and he
had been closed for three weeks, inasmuch as the crew consisting
entirely of blacks, he had no one to open himself to. He told of how
he worked the vessel entirely with blacks, Barbadians, and when he had
exhausted his slight interest in Gaspard and his history he returned
to himself, talking as though Gaspard were an old friend just stepped
aboard, the freemasonry of the south and a common birthplace giving
him the familiarity of long acquaintanceship. There was scarcely a
disreputable transaction in which a ship’s keel could find a place but
it seemed that Captain Sagesse and his barque, the _Belle Arlésienne_,
had been in it—gun running in the Spanish-American war, smuggling,
and worse. He owned the vessel, he owned property in Martinique and
very questionable property in St. Pierre; and inspired now by rum and
what seemed at first blush a charming and natural naïveté, he told
about himself and his doings, his possessions and aspirations with
characteristic force and freedom.

Gaspard, at first half drowsy with weariness, listened like a person in
a dream to the chatter of the other, then, the rum beginning to take
effect upon him, he found himself laughing at things which might have
made him frown if listened to in strict sobriety. He was sinner enough,
but in his small way in life he had dealt straightly with his fellows,
he had, at all events, no feeling for a scoundrel, and Captain Sagesse
was scoundrel enough, heaven knows, to judge by his conversation. He
had got the better of governments, men, and women; he gave neither
names nor dates nor places, talking in his loose way with nothing
more definite than, “It was an islet, it might have been fifty miles
south or fifty miles north of Rum Cay—but that doesn’t matter,” or
“Honorine, that might have been her name, but it wasn’t, anyhow, I’ll
tell you the trick she served Pierre Sagesse, and then I’ll tell you
the trick he served her.”

All at once the brain of Gaspard, drowsed by the events of the day,
cleared, perception became acute, sensation beatified, two glasses of
strong rum and the Martinique _bout_ which the Captain had given him,
had opened for him the door of the Brandy Paradise; the deck-house of
_La Belle Arlésienne_ seemed palatial, Sagesse the greatest of men and
he, Gaspard Cadillac, the equal of Sagesse.

He held out his glass for more rum.

“And mark you,” said Sagesse as he poured it out, “I got my hold on her
in that way, because, _mordieu_, I remembered those two words she said
that night to the mate of the _Bayonnaise_. They thought I was drunk,
but I have never been drunk in my life, and I never forget.”

“Nor I,” said Gaspard, “never been drunk and never forget.” The
recollection of Anisette and Yves came up in his mind, and he thumped
the table with his fist. “I have served my man out. No, I never forget.
Now you listen—” But Sagesse was off on another tack, money business
this time, and Gaspard rocking unsteadily in his seat with his eyes
injected, the cigar in the corner of his mouth, and his fists clenched
on the table before him, sat hearing nothing, glorified in the hideous
upset of alcohol, filled with the splendour of his own importance, and
tormented on his throne by something, he knew not what, but which took
the form of Yves.

It was the woman of Marseilles still working like a demon at his heart
and brought into full life by the drink. The feeling that another man
had done him out. That another man had been preferred to him. That
another man was a better animal, even though that man was dead. Alcohol
told him that he was glorious, supreme, a man amongst men. Anisette
like a pale, sneering ghost said “Pshaw. Where is Yves. _You_, you are
nothing to a woman.”

“And it was worth seven thousand dollars American gold coin,” Sagesse
was saying in the course of his yarn, when Gaspard, whipping the belt
and pouch from his waist, brought them down on the table with a bang,
so that the gold coins rolled out.

“Look at that,” cried Gaspard. “What you say? Wasn’t that worth the
thrust of a knife?” The coins danced before him as he sat rocking in
his seat, an abstemious man as a rule, the weariness and the strong old
rum had done their work.

Sagesse stopped short in his story, stared at the belt and the gold and
then at the man before him. Sagesse, though he chattered of his own
doings, never by any chance gave a man a handle to use against him;
his tales were as vague, all save the villainy of them, as clouds; his
one weakness was talking and he knew it and guarded against it, the
villainies he boasted of were all apocryphal; based they were on black
deeds, just as clouds are based on mountains, the scoundrel in him had
to boast, but to bring Sagesse to book on one of his stories would be
like attempting to bring a bird to earth by grasping at its shadow on
the ground.

Men had tried to blackmail this _raconteur_ on the strength of his
statements; to bring the vulture to earth by catching at his shadow,
only to find themselves in the vulture’s clutch, blackmailed themselves
most cruelly. And he never let go as long as his clutch held, and there
was a feather on the victim. But though he chattered fables, he knew
when to be silent in face of facts. He was silent now. He laughed but
said nothing for a moment, whilst Gaspard gathering the coins together
in a heap, reiterated his question.

“What you say—isn’t that worth the thrust of a knife?—given in fair
fight, mind you, man to man, and the better man wins.” Sagesse held out
his hand, took a coin, examined it and handed it back.

“_Bon Dieu_, yes. So you killed him—but where did he get these things
from, they are not coins of to-day. Had he, then, been robbing a
museum?”

Gaspard nodded with drunken gravity.

“That’s it, you’ve hit it, he robbed someone of them and wouldn’t
share, it was over there on the island.”

“Aha,” said Sagesse. “So you killed him on the island, _vé_, but you
are a man after my own heart, the island—and the name of your man you
said was—”

“Yves.”

Gaspard exhausted, falling into the third stage of intoxication, was
leaning now over the table, his eyelids drooping, the cigar end, no
longer alight, held loosely in his nerveless fingers.

“Yves—and what rating was he?”

“Stoker.”

“So—but he had another name, he was not only called Yves?”

“What you say?” asked Gaspard, rousing slightly.

Sagesse repeated his question, but the man at the table did not seem
to comprehend, then, stricken with sleep he sank completely forward,
his head resting right cheek down on the table, his right hand on
the pouch containing the money. Sagesse looked at him for a moment
contemplatively, then he went to the door and cried, “Jules.” A
shuffling sound came along the deck, and a big negro, bare-footed and
bare-breasted, with his wool all tied up in little knots, made his
appearance at the door.

Sagesse pointed to the man at the table, and Jules with a broad grin
but without a word, entered and took the dreamer by the shoulders,
Sagesse took him by the feet, and between them they carried him to the
starboard dog hole, which did duty for a mate’s cabin when a mate was
on board. Here they put him in the bunk, Sagesse placed the belt and
pouch of money in the bunk beside him, then they closed the door on him
and left him to his slumbers.

When Sagesse found himself alone, he took a chart from a locker, spread
it on the table and pored over it.

Gaspard had told him that he had only been drifting since morning. If
this were so, if the man were not lying, and if, indeed, he had left
an island that morning, then the only island he possibly could have
left was here marked on the chart, a tiny island reef beset to North,
South, and East; eighty miles or so southeast of Turks Island.

Sagesse knew the Caribbean Sea and the Atlantic that includes the
Bahamas as well, almost, as he knew the heart of the lower order of
mankind. He knew from his own knowledge, and leaving the chart aside,
that there was only one islet about here from which a boat could drift
or be rowed in the course of a day to the point where he had picked
up his new acquaintance. He knew the island by sight, too, the clump
of seven palm trees, the white sandy beach, and the murderous reefs.
He had seen it through the glass several times, in past years. He had
counted the palms, seven of them. He never forgot anything; that was
partly why from a foremast hand in the French mercantile marine, he had
risen to wealth and eminence of a sort. He fetched a pen and inkhorn
from the locker, and made just over the islet the form of a tiny cross,
then he put the chart, pen and ink back in their places and came on
deck.

The moon had risen, still a crescent but strong enough to flood the
sea with light. Jules had relieved the man at the wheel, and stood a
dusky ghost before the yellow binnacle light, the wind still held and
had even strengthened a little, and in the silence of the night the
click of the rudder chain, the wash of the water at the bow, and the
occasional groan of hemp-rope and block could be heard.

The barquentine seemed talking to herself in an undertone. Old
and weary of the sea, dressed in canvas, patched and stained and
ill-fitting, barnacled and streaming southern weeds from her copper,
she went her way across the moonlit water, steering now, to make the
passage between Haiti and Porto Rico; a hag of the ocean groping her
way from port to port, now on honest business, now on contraband, from
Yucatan to Port of Spain.




CHAPTER XIII

LA BELLE ARLÉSIENNE


At about six o’clock the next morning Gaspard awoke from sleep, half
stifled by the close air of the little cabin where Sagesse had placed
him. The taste of the rum was still in his mouth, and at a stroke, and
almost at the return of consciousness, the doings of the past night
rose before him—up to a certain point. He remembered the conversation
of Sagesse, he remembered taking the belt from his waist and flinging
it and the pouch of money on the table, but beyond that point he
remembered nothing.

He put his hand to his waist, belt and bag were gone. He put his legs
out of the bunk, and was just in the act of getting on his feet when
his hand rested on something hard, it was the pouch. It had not been
tampered with, he could tell that by the feel, but, to make sure, he
opened it and counted the gold pieces by the dim light which shone
through the scuttle overhead.

Yes, the twenty-one pieces of gold were there, solid, bright and hard.
He put the belt round his waist and buttoning his coat over the pouch
came on deck.

_La Belle Arlésienne_, close hauled under all sail, was making a full
eight knots steering S. S. E. with the coast of Haiti a line on the
southern horizon. She had altered her course in the night and she
lay now with the shoals and reefs south of Turks Island on her port
quarter, but nothing of them shewed, for the sea over that way under
the newborn sun lay like a blazing gem, a sheet of corrugated crystal,
each of whose million, million facets was a mirror; then, round from
there to where the bowsprit was poking at the sky above the sea line
went the sea, without sail or sign of life deepening in blueness to
where the far-off Haitian coast lay hyacinth coloured in the morning.

Gaspard looked around him, he could see no sign of Sagesse; a negro
dressed in a pair of canvas trousers held by a single suspender, stood
at the wheel, several more were grouped round the fo’csle-head engaged
on some business, and a thin streak of smoke from the caboose told of
breakfast in progress.

From where he stood the deck stretched away unencumbered by cargo,
and barred by the shadows of the standing rigging; they had taken the
boat on board, and she was lying bottom up on the deck forward of the
mainmast.

Despite her age, despite the decks so yellow stained by time that plank
and dowel were of the same colour and indistinguishable, despite the
sails all cut and patched, the old barquentine had still a look of
buoyancy and life caught from the brave morning light and the flooding
azure of sea and sky.

The smell of tar and bilge and rope, the groan of rubber and creak of
mast brought up for Gaspard the vision of the _Tamalpais_ and his early
youth. No other sensation is at all like the feel of a sailing ship
beneath one’s feet. The steamer is a dead weight driven by an alien
force, its progression is a continual insult to the wind and the sea,
but the sailing ship is one with the sea and the wind, her motion is
fluent, fresh, and part of the eternal movement of nature. As Gaspard
stood with his eyes fixed on the distant Haitian coast, Sagesse came
out of the deck-house and gave him good-morning.

The Captain had a telescope in his hand, and ranging himself beside
Gaspard he began to examine the coast-line attentively through the
glass.

Not a word did he say of the proceedings of the past night. He stood
picking out the points and headlands of the coast, remarking on them
now and then, and now and then throwing in some piece of reminiscence,
as “Over there—you can just see that bluish spot, it goes in deep,
the land there—that’s where a big English ship went on the rocks. The
_Severn_ in the storm of ’82. I helped in the salving. _Ma foi_, I have
never seen such a big ship with her back so broken. She was opened out
like a band-box. She was filled with millinery, too. New York fashions
for Jamaica; the rocks were dressed in chiffon, it was like the wreck
of the _Bon Marché_, and the negresses came down to help—you can
fancy!” or “That point, you can just see it with the eye to eastward
of the blue spot, over there they hanged the last of the pirates,
Freemantle—”

“What does he know, what did I say last night. I remember flinging the
money on the table, I remember saying something about Yves—but what?
Did I say much, did I say little? And the money, he must have picked
it up and put it in the pouch, and put the pouch and belt beside me as
I lay in the bunk, hog that I was—_mordieu_—what did I say?” These
thoughts were running through Gaspard’s mind as he stood watching his
companion and listening to his remarks almost without comprehending
them.

But Sagesse, whatever he knew, shewed nothing of his knowledge. He
chatted familiarly and easily, and when breakfast was brought aft by
Jules they sat down to it, and over the steaming coffee and fried bacon
and bananas, the Captain continued his easygoing discourse, chatting
on everything and nothing, but always with interest.

The blackguardly edge had gone off his conversation, it was only at
night it appeared whetted by alcohol, for Sagesse was a methodical
drinker, never glancing at the bottle till the absinthe hour.

Gaspard during the meal made an offer of work, but Sagesse would not
hear of it.

“You are a brother Provençal, well, I have picked you up floating about
on the sea and that’s all about it, I have more than enough hands to
work the ship, and your food, what does it cost? Besides, we can settle
up at St. Pierre. St. Pierre, Martinique, yes that is my port. You have
never been there? Ah, _mordieu_, then you have never seen life, you
will see it at St. Pierre where men know how to laugh, and love is as
cheap as bananas.”

“Well, I will be able to pay you,” said Gaspard, “that is to say if I
ever can pay you for all you have done for me.”

Sagesse laughed.

His face, ordinarily pleasant except for a certain fixity of the eyes,
lost its pleasantness in some strange way when he laughed.

Clean shaved, except for a rather heavy and drooping moustache, fat and
weather-tanned, in white cap and apron, save for his bronzing he would
have made an ideal chef; a concocter of sauces and _entremets_, fat
with the steam of his kitchen; but when he laughed he shewed his teeth
and just that one touch destroyed his _bonhommie_, for his laughter did
not extend above his mouth, and laughter is inhuman when the eyes do
not correct the teeth.

All day they kept the Haitian coast on the distant horizon, the water
had been blue off the island, but to Gaspard, as he hung over the side,
it seemed that this water was even bluer. It was; the Caribbean, that
great lake of burning indigo, was sending its colour to meet them, the
foam flakes from the fore-foot of the _Belle Arlésienne_ swept past
like marble shavings cast on slabs of lapis-lazuli, and violets would
have seemed pale and faded held against the background of the sea to
southward.




CHAPTER XIV

THE MONEY-CHANGER


Gaspard, though a man full-grown and a man, moreover, who had passed
his life in touch with the brutal side of things, had still in his
nature very much of the child. The Provençal rarely grows old, he
withers at last in the sun and comes to die, but the child in him
remains a child; imaginative, impulsive, easily moved to laughter or
tears, good or naughty, with a passion for colour, and movement, and
sound, and exaggeration. And so he remains a poet in his way.

Go all over the earth, and you will find man imitating the insect
in this particular, that he is the colour of the leaf he was born
on. Gaspard was the colour of Provence, and all the coal-dust of the
stokehold, the sordidness of the life had not altered his essential
colour; the something tragic, something gay, something vivacious,
something lazy which is part of the southern land of black shadows,
white roads, blue skies, keen mistral, and poignantly scented flowers
still clung to his personality.

Even Sagesse shewed something of a trace of this in the exaggeration of
his own doings, in his vivacity, and in the flower which he carried in
his button-hole when ashore.

But there was little of the child about Sagesse and much of the master.
As day followed day, and the working of the vessel shewed itself more
and more to Gaspard, astonishment filled him at the extraordinary
discipline amidst the hands, and the way Sagesse worked them. When
he was out of sight they would shout and chatter amongst themselves,
but the instant he appeared silence took the deck as it takes a grove
of chattering birds when a hawk appears in the sky overhead. Orders
were executed at a run, yet he never swore or raised his voice louder
than was necessary; occasionally when a man got in the way, as on the
night of Gaspard’s boarding the vessel, he would give him a kick just
as a master might kick a dog, but beyond that his rule seemed kindly.
They were all Barbadians, these blacks, and English-speaking, with the
exception of Jules who was Haitian born, but Sagesse could talk to them
fluently in their own language. He could talk four languages, French,
Spanish, English, and Portuguese; he had picked the three foreign
languages up as a means to trade, and it was to his mastery of them, as
much as his own astuteness, that he owed his success in life.

One night, sultry and cloudless with the sea like frosted silver under
the starlight and the warm breathing of the wind, Gaspard, going into
the deck-house found Sagesse seated at the table before a chart.

“If this wind holds,” said Sagesse, “we should sight Martinique at
dawn.” He spoke with his eyes upon the chart, then, looking up: “What
do you propose to do when you get there?”

“Oh, as for me I don’t know,” said Gaspard taking a seat opposite the
other. “Report myself to the _Compagnie Transatlantique_—draw what pay
is owing to me, and try and get recompense for my kit.”

“Well,” said Sagesse, “if I were in your place, I would let all that
slip.”

“How?”

“_Ma foi_, how?—say nothing, or as little as you can, report yourself,
but do not trouble about compensation.”

“And why?”

Sagesse laughed, “Because my friend, it is not well to stir muddy
water; you get before one of these infernal clerks with a pen in his
hand, and he takes notes of what you say, you ask for compensation and
he says, ‘Yes, yes, that is just, compensation, certainly, but first
my friend, prove yourself to be whom you say you are, and give us your
story in detail.’ Then with the point of his pen he turns you inside
out and,” said Sagesse tapping on the table with his thumb, “it is not
well to be turned inside out if one has anything to conceal.”

“To conceal?”

“For instance,” went on Sagesse, “the official of the _Compagnie
Transatlantique_ might say, ‘Who was your engineer-in-chief, who was
your second engineer, had you a chum, what was his name?’”. Sagesse
watching Gaspard narrowly saw the sweat start on his forehead, laughed,
and finished, “and you would not say, ‘His name is Yves, he escaped
with me, we landed on an island, he had a belt about his waist and a
pouch containing a number of valuable gold coins which he had stolen,
and I killed him and took the money.’ You would not say that, perhaps,
with your tongue, but your face might give a hint, or your manner, and
a hint might lead to a suspicion, and a suspicion to a search—_you
should have burned that body_.”

Gaspard, staring at the man before him, felt as though an ice-cold
blade had been driven through his heart, his flesh crawled. He had
told all, then, to this man, and more than all. He felt nothing of
what the criminal feels whose crime has been discovered, for he felt
himself innocent of crime or criminal intent. It was the horror of the
fact that he had given himself away, and under the influence of drink
had described the affair in such a manner that Sagesse believed him a
murderer—this it was that paralysed him for the moment.

For a moment only, then, thrusting his hands out as though he were
putting something away from him, he burst out, “I did not kill him for
money—it’s a lie. If I said so I lied—it was an accident. True, we
quarrelled about the money, but I did not kill him for it. The knife
only scratched him and he dropped. I had saved his life; does a man
murder another whose life he has saved? When I spoke, I was mad with
your cursed drink. If I had murdered him would I have told of it? I did
not kill him for money—do you believe me?”

“My friend,” replied Sagesse quite unmoved, “I believe you. But you
yourself admit the fact that you killed him.”

“Yes, by accident.”

“And took his money?”

“It did not belong to him. He had only just found it amidst the bushes,
the belt and the pouch. Why do you shake your head, do you not believe
me?”

“Whether I believe you or not, does it matter—? This man had found
money, you killed him—by accident, with a knife, and took his money.
Does your reason not tell you that such a tale is enough to hang the
Archbishop of Paris—but it is all your affair, and as I said just
now, my advice is to let the thing lie. Do not disturb dead bones. Let
us forget it, and be practical. If I chose, I could hand you over to
the authorities at Martinique to-morrow. I have marked on the chart
the position where you boarded me, and the position of that island,
which is the only one in that vicinity. But it would not be of the
least profit to me to get you into trouble. Not in the least. I would
much sooner help you. Well, to business. That money will be your worst
friend, instead of your best if you try to use it ashore as it is, you
must change it for good American dollars. Put it on the table and I
will change it for you.”

“Before God,” burst out Gaspard, “I will do nothing unless you believe
me when I say that I came by it rightly, that there is no stain of
blood on it, that what happened there on the island was an accident,
and that I am no murderer!”

Sagesse, who knew man thoroughly, and who ever since the first morning
of their acquaintance had been studying him minutely, rose to his feet
and slapped his right hand down on the table palm uppermost.

“I believe you, there, the words are said and let us say no more on the
matter—how far others would believe you, it is not for me to say, but
there, let the matter end and come to business.”

He sat down again, and Gaspard opening the pouch at his waist put the
coins on the table in a heap.

Sagesse counted them. “_Dieu_,” said he, holding one in his hand and
examining it. “Fancy trying to change this lot at a banker’s or _bureau
de change_, they would be enough to raise a blister on the reputation
of a saint. I can get rid of them, though; with difficulty it is true,
but still I can get rid of them. But I don’t take risks without a
chance of good profits. I will give you forty dollars for the lot.”

“Less than two dollars apiece?”

“Slightly.”

“_Mordieu_,” said Gaspard. “I would as soon throw them overboard.”

Sagesse put both his elbows on the table and laughed. Then the haggling
began. Gaspard, the son of a tradesman, had something of the business
man in his nature. It was a strange picture, and not without its
romantic side. The two southerners seated opposite to each other at
the table of the dingy deck-house, the swinging lamp overhead casting
its light on the chart, the pieces of gold, and the strenuous faces of
the barterers.

One might imagine that Sagesse, having the game, seemingly, in his
hands, would have forced his terms on the other; but that would be
without counting on the character of the Captain and the laws which
governed his life. “Never appeal to social laws unless in the last
extremity. Never use force against a man stronger than yourself. Take
the pyx, but leave the priest the chalice (in other words—do not strip
a man so bare that he will turn upon you in desperation)”—these were
three of the laws governing this wise man’s actions. He was an artist
in scoundrelism, for he knew the value of restraint.

“Sixty dollars, then,” said Sagesse, after they had been haggling for
half an hour or more. “You agree, good, of course I will make my profit
on them, but what would you have? I am a trader, _vé_—, and I will
give you more than sixty dollars; I will give you advice.”

“Yes?”

“Don’t go back to the stokehold. With sixty dollars in Martinique you
may start a little business. Go shares in a fishing boat, deal in
fruit—you are young and active, and in Martinique sixty dollars are
equal to six hundred at Havre or in Paris. I will shew you the ropes,
as the English say. Do you know, monsieur, that I, Pierre Sagesse, have
started by my advice and help a dozen people in Martinique who are now
prospering?”

He had risen, and all the time he was talking he was searching in the
locker where he kept his charts. At last he drew forth a little chamois
bag and, opening it, shot out on the table the money it contained. The
little bag held exactly sixty dollars in gold coin and some silver.

“_Ma foi_, the exact sum; that is odd and ought to be a sign of luck.
There is your money, and I will not take the belt and pouch; you can
keep them.”

Gaspard pocketed the money. It was more than odd that the little
chamois leather bag held the exact sum in question. He felt certain
that Sagesse, days before, had worked out the problem of what he should
pay for the coins, and had placed this sum in readiness.

The character of the man lay revealed in that act, as also in the way
he had kept dumb about Yves till the moment of his purpose.

Gaspard felt certain that had it suited his interests Sagesse would
have betrayed him to the authorities. He left the deck-house, and
leaning against the starboard bulwarks, looked over the starlit sea.

Though he had left the island blue leagues behind, it still pursued
him, and, in the form of Sagesse, still had a hold upon him, the island
and the deed committed there.

He could see it still, just as he saw it when making his escape. The
sun-stricken palms, the white beach, the white surf breaking on the
beach, the white gulls—he could hear their voices calling to him.

“Hi, Hi, Hi! You there in the boat! come back! come back! Hi! think you
to escape us? Ha! Ha! Hi! Fishing, wheeling! calling! O the weariness,
the blueness, the waves, the wind, the sun. They are ours and they are
yours forever—forever—forever. Hi!”




CHAPTER XV

THE MAGIC TOWN


He was awakened next morning by the roar of the anchor-chain through
the hawse-pipe.

Five minutes later he was on deck.

_La Belle Arlésienne_, steered by magic hands during the night, had
raised some magic horizon and passed it to anchor in paradise. So it
seemed to him as his eyes travelled from the cloud turban of Mont Pelée
coloured by the dawn, and followed the tumbling woods, the cascades of
leaping foliage high, far off, dark in shadow, falling to the hillside
city; and the city breaking from the woods, falling street by street
to the harbour’s edge; palm-tops peeping above the red-tiled roofs;
houses, shadows, palms; tracery of gardens, squares, step flights
from street to street; old moss-grown flights of steps, old gardens
and scraps of gardens giving shelter to the grenadilla and the fleur
d’amour; old houses, heavy-built and lightly coloured, all stretching
from the great high woods to the very edge of the shadowy harbour in
whose depths the blue of night still lay.

The blue of night—though the sky above Pelée was ablaze with the
morning blue. Over on the east of the island at Grande Anse the morning
was already full and splendid, but here the shadow of peak and morn
held everything in magical _chiara oscuro_. The city, seen as though
through a vague veil of gauze, seemed asleep, yet it was burning
with early morning life, and Gaspard, as he watched, could see the
moving figures of people, forms trickling down the steep flights of
steps leading from street to street, and swarming by the sea-steps and
harbour side.

Held, just for a moment, in this curious twilight lingering in the
shadow of Pelée, whilst all the sea world beyond flashed to the
sun-blaze of the tropics, the old sea-city of St. Pierre hanging,
literally, between sky and sea, between dawn and night, between the
present and the past, shewed to the mind those pictures of suggestion
which lie in tapestry and verse.

Gaspard had never seen anything at all like this. He had seen many a
tropic town where the galvanized tin roof of the trader, or the rigid
outlines of the Methodist meeting house broke crudely through the
beauty of palmiste and orange. But St. Pierre lay before him beautiful,
absolutely beautiful, like a dream city set in Wonderland.

Nothing could be more wonderful than those torrential woods far up
above the houses, woods of balisier and palm, tamarind, ceiba, and
giant fern; lianas cable thick, air shoots, all climbing in the
twilight, and leading the eyes to the slopes of Pelée and the peak,
cloud-wreathed and burning in the blue.

Nothing could be more strange or more poetical than the city reaching
from these woods to the shadowy sea.

Other vessels were anchored in the harbour, boats were putting out from
the shore; now, clear and sharp-cut, through the vague noises of early
morning came the note of a bugle from the fort, and from a sailing-ship
away to starboard the clank of capstan pawls and the cry of sailors
hauling on the halyards.

With and through everything came the perfume of the land, earth and
tropic flowers, jasmine and vanilla scents, mixed with the scent of the
sea.

Gaspard turned from the city and looked westward. Beyond the shadow
of the island the sea lay in the bright daylight, shewing beneath the
emerald ring of the horizon the virginal blue of early morning.

As he turned, Sagesse left the deck-house and stood for a moment
looking on the land before speaking to his companion.

“Better than the stokehold,” said the Captain, who had put on a clean
suit of white drill, and a shore-going and holiday manner; “better than
the engine-room, _vé_! Look, the _canotiers_ are putting off and the
port officers will be aboard us before we have finished breakfast.”

Jules appeared, as he spoke, from the caboose, bearing a steaming
coffee-pot; they went into the deck-house for the meal, and before
it was half through and, as if to bear out the truth of Sagesse’s
prediction, the port officers arrived.

They came into the deck-house, where Sagesse served them with vermouth
and cigarettes; they seemed to know Sagesse as a friend, and bill of
lading or bill of health seemed to trouble them very little as far as
Gaspard could judge, who, in the middle of the cigarette smoking and
exchange of news, left Sagesse to his friends and came on deck.

He found a new St. Pierre. Colour had stolen over the slopes of Pelée;
light had stretched out her hand and torn away the veil of twilight. A
burst of blue struck him in the face as he left the dingy deck-house. A
sky of blue, a sea of blue, triumphant, crystalline, dazzling, and in
the midst of this world of leaping lazulite, St. Pierre standing like a
dreamer awakened by the sea.

Awakened from where the high woods were rocking and singing in the
morning wind, to where the breeze-swept harbour was lipping ship side
and quay with the flash of sapphire satin.

One could see, so clear was the air, the tiles on the red-tiled roofs
and the palm fronds bursting above them; a flag was flickering above
some consulate, the palm-tops were dancing to the breeze that bore on
its hot breath the scent of earth and trees and the sounds of the city
that seemed less a city than a daring aquarelle, blindingly beautiful,
triumphantly bright.

Round the _Belle Arlésienne_ _canotiers_ were paddling; banana-coloured
children in little coffin-shaped canoes made out of old packing-cases,
canned meat cases, anything in the form of a box that could be cut into
the form of a canoe. They were chattering to the black sailors, and
when they saw Gaspard they shouted to him to fling them coins to dive
for, but before he could put his hand in his pocket Sagesse and the
port officers left the deck-house.

The newcomers had offered to row Sagesse and Gaspard ashore, and the
captain had evidently told them of the fate of the _Rhone_, for, as
they crossed the harbour, Gaspard found himself an object of interest
and plied with a hundred questions. At the sight of Sagesse the little
_canotiers_ had dispersed in every direction, and now, as they rowed,
Gaspard could hear the thin voices of the children chanting a song;
he caught the word “Sagesse” repeated over and over again, but the
lisping _patois_ and the breeze dimmed all else but the spirit of the
ballad—Derision. Sagesse was not, evidently, a favorite with the
_canotiers_ of St. Pierre, yet, to look at him seated by the port
doctor, a cigar in his mouth and his thumbs stuck in his waist-belt,
one might have fancied him a man to whom children would run by instinct.

He was in grand good humour this morning; so was Gaspard; so, too,
seemed the port officers. The joyous city seemed to radiate gaiety;
the languor of midday had not yet fallen upon it and it laughed like a
child awakened by a kiss on a bright morning.

The harbour-side was crowded; naked children, half-naked men, black
men, banana-coloured men, apricot-coloured men, chattering in that
French worn smooth which is the language of the French West Indies, a
language in which _Monsieur_ becomes _Missie_, _Maman_, _Manmam_, and
_France_, _Fouance_.

Amidst the ‘longshoremen, the idlers, the _canotiers_, fishermen, and
boatmen, strayed the forms of a few women, bright as tropic birds,
graceful in striped foulards and jupes of exquisite colours, their
wasp-yellow turbans striking the eye forcibly, the brightest points in
a picture surcharged with colour and blinding light.

Sinbad never landed at a stranger port than this, so vividly real, so
far removed from the commonplace, so filled with the presence of the
past.

Romance sat on the very sea-steps, and as Gaspard landed he felt what
every man who ever landed at St. Pierre must have felt vividly or
vaguely—her touch.

Sagesse, bidding good-day to the port officers, struck uptown
accompanied by Gaspard. Uptown, by flights of old steps, worn,
moss-grown, shadowed by the black shadows of houses and roofed with a
ribbon of blinding azure sky, everywhere the sound of running water
from the thousand conduits and fountains, everywhere the sound of the
sea echoing as in the whorl of a great shell.

The stepways led to streets, lines of blazing light and colour,
verandahed, broken by black house shadows, filled with coloured people
of all shades, all hues, from the muletresse to the chabine; all busy,
moving, drifting, chattering, buying or selling, finely formed,
graceful as the palmistes.

Then more steps haunted by fountain and sea sounds, and they entered a
river of light—the Rue Victor Hugo.

Gaspard, as he reached the street, looked back down the steep and
twilight vico they had ascended, and saw the harbour, liquid shadow on
which, seeming suspended in air, floated _La Belle Arlésienne_.

It was like a picture closing the first chapter of his life; the sea,
and the island, and the ever-crying gulls, dead Yves, the stokehold,
Marseilles, all lay there. Here was a new land and the beginning of a
new existence. The sea, the island, the man he had slain—all beyond
there. It all seemed remote, done with forever; yet it was close to
him, potently alive in the form of Captain Sagesse, and able to stretch
out a hand and touch him on the shoulder if so it chose.




CHAPTER XVI

RUE VICTOR HUGO


White umbrellas, striped verandahs, black shadows, laughter, motion,
colour, coloured people, coloured clothes, lemon-tinted houses,
flower-blue sky, a street of light beneath a roof of azure, the Rue
Victor Hugo lay before Gaspard.

Looking straight before one, the scene recalled Naples, Marseilles,
Alexandria, with an extra touch as though a gleam, a perfume, a voice,
had stolen from some vanished coloured city of the remote past; as
though Pompeii had sent an idler, Carthage a trader, Tunis a coloured
child, to lose themselves in the crowd and lend it, scarcely seen, a
heart-catching subtlety.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is no sound of feet; everyone is shoeless; they walk in a whisper
under the wonderful blue light of the sky, these people, these men and
women of all shades of yellow, graceful, dignified, gracious, who might
seem the inhabitants of a dream city but for the sounds of everyday
life, cries of cigar vendors, and pastry vendors, and fruit sellers,
children’s voices, laughter; now comes from far away the music of a
mirliton; it is playing in a street below—Pouf! up a steep side street
comes the sound, louder, and carried on a breath of hot sea wind, and
there below the blue face of the harbour laughs up at you so high above
it. You pass on; the shops surround you again, and the crowd and the
voices; you reach a little square, a cube of colour; in its centre like
a diamond flower forever in motion, the jet of a fountain plays in
the sun, plays and sings to itself like the spirit of a happy child;
and here where human voices are less loud you hear the sound of other
fountains, the sound of rivulets, runnels racing by the side walks,
pipes that empty into moss-grown channels all drawing their water from
Mont Pelée, fatherly, and seated far above the great torrential woods,
sky-throned, and turbaned with cloud.

You go on; the endless street bends and dips and rises again, never
quite level; houses and blue bursts of sea alternating on the right,
on the left, high above you, houses that break with their sun-stricken
yellow the green foliage of the high woods. The torrent of yellow
houses up above seems tumbling to the sea, or, if you like it better,
the houses seem climbing to attack the woods. You can hear from up
there wood sounds, the piping of the _siffleur de montagne_, the wash
of moving foliage, just as you can hear from below the sounds of the
sea, the songs of the fishermen, and the wash of the water on the beach.

As a curious and beautiful poem leads you to read on, so the coloured
and sunlit street leads you to follow it; it brings you by a bridge
across the Rivière Roxelane, where the washerwomen work from dawn
till dark, and the boulders are snowed with linen, and so to the
market-place, where the strangest things from sea and land are sold.

Beyond lie the mornes, green to the water’s edge; the sea, the sky;
great blue wastes of sun and silence.

       *       *       *       *       *

From a flower-seller as they entered the Rue Victor Hugo, Sagesse had
bought a gaudy blossom which he put in his coat.

He was _en fête_ and his good humour was infectious; linking his arm
in that of Gaspard, he had led him into a café, a cool, spacious shop
set out with marble-topped tables. On every table there was a little
bowl filled with bright-coloured blossoms; men were seated about, men
in cool white clothes and broad panama hats. As Gaspard followed his
companion between the tables he noticed that all these men gave Sagesse
good-day as though he were an old acquaintance, but without enthusiasm,
and with a certain constraint.

Then, choosing a table in a corner, they sat down, and Sagesse beckoned
to the bartender. He came running.

He had been piling some glasses on a tray and had not caught sight of
the newcomers until just before Sagesse beckoned to him; instantly,
and almost upsetting the tray in his haste, he came, and now he stood,
a middle-aged quadroon, mild-eyed, subdued-looking, standing before
Sagesse as a slave might stand before his master.

“_Bonjour_, Jules.”

“_Bonjour_, missie.”

“How has trade been since I left?”

“Good, missie—Jules has been busy, very busy, for most a month—before
that not so good.” He spoke in the Creole _patois_, soft, fluent, a
language that seems made for the lips of children.

Sagesse ordered drinks. When they were on the table he lit a cigar,
handed Gaspard another, and then, crossing his legs and suddenly
changing his manner:

“Let us talk business,” said he.

“Business?”

“_Ma foi_, yes; that’s what they call it—business. See here. I want
the true story of the gold in that belt. I want to know more about that
island, and I want to know something about that treasure-ship.”

When you encounter a tropical centipede the thing that astonishes
you most is the way in which it changes form, now effacing itself
altogether in some coign of shadow, now drawn out, swollen, vicious,
and ready to attack you, now shrunken, drawn together, a mere nothing
that, next moment to a touch becomes distended and viciously alive.

The mind of Captain Sagesse seemed to possess this centipede attribute.

Gaspard had imagined the affair of the island done with; he had
imagined that with the conclusion of the bargain over the gold pieces
Sagesse had passed the matter behind him. He had said nothing about a
treasure-ship. The ship of coral in the lagoon had been always present
in his mind as a ship that might contain treasure, but he had said
nothing about it. How, then, had Sagesse read his thoughts, and why had
he not spoken of it before?

He stared at the Captain for a moment without speaking. “But that’s all
done with,” said he at last. “I’ve told you my story; you’ve had your
share in the stuff—Don’t you believe me? And see here, what do you
mean about a treasure ship? I never said a word about such a thing.”

“My friend,” said Sagesse, “between the captain and the mate’s cabin
on my vessel there is only a plank, and when the man sleeping in the
mate’s cabin shouts out in his sleep ‘Hullo there, Yves, look, I can
see through her hatch; she’s full of gold; we’ll fetch it out—share
and share alike,’ the captain sets himself to think. He says to
himself, ‘this man talks of a ship full of gold in his sleep; he came
on board my ship from an island over there; he had in his possession a
number of old coins, old Spanish pieces; he confesses in drink that he
has killed Monsieur Yves, the gentleman to whom in his dreams he talks
of a ship full of treasure; well, don’t you see?”

“What?”

“The conclusion—come, confess, you have a secret; give me the full
story of that affair, or by my soul and on my honour I will call the
authorities right in here and tell them a lot of things I know.”

Sagesse, as he said the last words, changed completely, and in a
moment, the _bon bourgeois_ vanished, his upper lip raised slightly,
disclosing the teeth. Just in that moment he shewed himself what he
was, not a villain of romance, but that much more terrible individual,
the petty trader, heartless, careful, calculating. The squid of society
that, living on crabs and shell-fish, will, when opportunity offers,
seize and devour a man.

What numbed the mind of Gaspard was not fear of the authorities, but
fear of Sagesse and astonishment at his methods.

He felt as though in the grip of some gelatinous thing, this dusky
mind had gripped him on board the _Belle Arlésienne_ and had seemed to
let him go; its tentacles had fallen from his arms, and now they were
around his feet. It was useless to fight with Sagesse; he was at the
man’s mercy; betrayed by drink, he had put himself in the grasp of the
cuttlefish.

“Look here,” said he at last, “before I tell you anything, tell me
this: Why did you not spring this on me before? Why did you trade with
me for those coins? Why did you pretend to be my friend?”

“Why did I trade with you, _ma foi_? I traded with you because I wanted
those coins at a fair price; I brought you here because I wanted to
trade with you for your secret at a fair price with the law at my
elbow. I did not wish to conclude the bargain on board my own ship; it
gives a ship a bad name when men are brought off her in chains by the
police. I wanted no police on board _La Belle Arlésienne_. And as to
pretending to be your friend, _ma foi_, I am your friend, and you shall
have your share of the profits of your secret. But the truth I must
have, come—”

“_Dieu!_” cried Gaspard with a burst of irritation. “I was hiding
nothing from you. There _was_ a wreck on the island; I _did_ think
there was treasure on her, but I had put it from my mind. I talked of
it in my sleep, did I? Well, it must have been there in my mind. You
shall have the story.”

Then, with his elbows on the table, he told how Yves had discovered the
ship in the lagoon; he described her. Sagesse, also with his elbows on
the table, listening intently, putting in a question now and then.

“That’s all,” finished Gaspard, “she may be up to the hatches with gold
for all I know—and for the matter of that—for all I care.”

Sagesse sat, now that the tale was told, musing in his chair, and
pulling at his heavy moustache.

“And you were on that island,” said he at last, “you saw that wreck,
you found gold and the dead bones of a man, you fancied there might be
more stuff there, yet, if I had not got the tale from you you would
have said nothing to anyone about it; you would have perhaps gone back
to the stokehold. Pah! I believe you, for that’s the kind of thing that
fills stokeholds with fools who are good for nothing but stoking—well,
you will be fortunate despite yourself. I take the speculation up.”

“You intend—”

“I intend to dynamite her open and see what she contains. When _La
Belle Arlésienne_ has discharged her cargo, I will put her in ballast,
take some diving apparatus and what else is needful, and return to that
island; you will go with me.”

“I?”

“Yes, you; do you think I want the whole of St. Pierre in the business?
I will take only my coloured crew; several of them are good divers, but
I must have another white man on a job like this. You will have your
share of the profits, fifteen per cent. That may be much, or it may be
nothing, but you will have to work for it, for it will be horse work
getting the stuff off her if she lies as you tell me. I take it she has
been lying in that lagoon all of a hundred years; if she is a Spaniard
there may be a lot of stuff—” Then, after a moment’s pause, “There is
stuff on that island; I smell it.”

He fell into a moment’s reverie, then, as if talking to himself, “the
fellow those bones belonged to had something to do with her; he was one
of her crew, or he was there hunting for treasure. He may have died of
starvation or accident, or he may have discovered the stuff and been
killed by his companions; if that was so they would not have left that
belt and money behind them.”

Gaspard sat watching Sagesse; the man’s mind seemed ferreting about the
business like a hound; he seemed actually to smell money in the thing.
Perhaps he did. There are men who in some uncanny way have the power of
scenting fortune; their speculations rarely fail; they know what will
appreciate in value, whether in land or stocks, and they will throw up
the most likely venture just because their genius has discovered in it
some hidden and fatal flaw unperceived by other men.

As Gaspard sat watching Sagesse a faint glow of enthusiasm began to
warm his breast. What man is there to whom the thought of hidden
treasure does not appeal? The idea of returning to the island would
have been hateful to him half an hour a go, but already his heart was
stirring to the venture.

He would not be alone.

Already he had divined the main points of Sagesse’s character—or
fancied he had—. He felt him to be cold-blooded, heartless,
calculating, yet he fancied that if Sagesse offered him fifteen francs
out of every hundred he made on the business he would keep his word.
With such a small percentage in view it would be easier to keep his
word than break it and make trouble. Sagesse came out of his reverie.

“Well,” said he, relighting his cigar, which had gone out, “there’s
an end of the matter. I take the thing up; I put my money in it; I
offer you your fifteen per cent.; I put you in the way, perhaps, of a
small fortune. I make you, in fact, a small partner in what may be a
big concern. Half an hour ago you were a Moco, and your end was the
drinking bar and the stokehold; you had stuff in your head that was
valuable to me and I had to blast it out of your skull by threats
of the law, just as I will blast the stuff out of that hooker with
dynamite. Well, what do you think of Pierre Sagesse? Is he a man who
knows his way about? Is he a man worth following? I’m frank as day
when I choose to be frank, and I tell you now, you may take the offer
or leave it; come with me, well and good; refuse it, and I will get
another man. Only, remember this, if you refuse you get nothing.”

“What you offer is perhaps fair enough,” said Gaspard, “but this I
will say, straight out, you treated me as a friend this morning; you
took my arm, you brought me in here, you stood for drinks, and then you
threatened me with that affair. I don’t like that, and be you who you
may, I say so.”

Sagesse took a puff at his cigar and then patiently, as though
explaining things to a child:

“You, this morning, were going about like a man with a jewel in his
empty skull; I operated like a surgeon, and took it out; it was
unpleasant, but there is the jewel, and instead of charging you a fee I
offer you a percentage on the value. If I had not threatened, you would
not have told. Well? What do you say?”

“I don’t say I won’t come—on one condition—that you never name that
affair again or threaten me with it.”

Sagesse laughed. “Threaten you, why should I? I have used the
instrument, I fling it away. I have got all I want out of you, and now
it is your turn to profit a bit. You will be very useful, and I don’t
want a stranger in the business.”

“Look here,” said Gaspard, true Provençal that he was, “fifteen per
cent.—make it twenty—”

“Not a cent more than fifteen, not a cent, not a centime. I never go
back on an offer of that sort.”

“When do you start?”

“It will take me a week to clear the cargo and get ready; meanwhile you
have your pocket full of dollars, and you can amuse yourself.”

“I will come.”

“Your word on that.”

“I give you my word.”

You will perhaps have divined that in the character of Gaspard, a
character primitive enough, childlike in some ways, and swayed by
elemental passions, there lay a streak of straightness. To this man,
who would not have known the meaning of “ethics,” straight-dealing came
as a natural gift. Sagesse had divined this fact and valued it, for,
speaking generally, there is no man in the world who values honour in
another more than your rogue.

“Come,” said the Captain, rising from his seat. “I have business to
do, and so have you. The _Compagnie Transatlantique_ office is close
here; go and report yourself; the port authorities will have you up
before them too; you will most likely find their man at the shipping
office, for I said you would be there, and, see here, you will want a
suit or two of white drill; those clothes you have are too heavy for
Martinique. Then you’ll want a room; there are sailors’ boarding-houses
by the harbour, steer clear of them.”

He took a little notebook from his pocket and wrote a name and address
on a sheet of paper, tore it out and handed it to his companion.

“Go there. Manman Faly, Rue du Morne, No. 3. She’ll put you up and find
you a place. It’s off the Grande Rue. You’ll easily find it; come.”

He turned to leave.

“We haven’t paid for the drinks,” said Gaspard, putting his hand in his
pocket.

Sagesse laughed. “I never pay here; the place is mine; Jules there
manages it for me; he’s one of my people.”

Gaspard was soon to learn how many unfortunates in St. Pierre came
under that designation, “One of my people.”

They passed out into the blinding street, under the flower-blue sky.
Only twenty yards or so down lay the shop where clothes could be
bought. Here Gaspard for twenty-two francs bought two suits of white
drill, a pair of white canvas shoes, and an imitation panama. He put on
one of the suits, and ordering the other to be sent to the address in
the Rue du Morne, walked out again feeling a new man.

In all his past, a shore landing had meant a landing in grimy clothes,
smoking and drinking in grimy bars, the foetor of the dock-side. Never
before had he found himself walking in a clean, bright city, in clean,
new clothes. It was delightful, new, absolutely new, and filled with
the freshness of surprise.

A pretty capresse girl glanced at him, and that was the last touch to
his vanity; he entered the office of the _Compagnie Transatlantique_,
where Sagesse left him, walking with an assured step, made his
deposition before the manager and one of the port authorities who was
present, signed it, and then, quite sure of himself and disregarding
Sagesse’s advice, demanded an indemnity for his lost kit and his wages
up to date.

For once the wise Sagesse had given the wrong advice, for the manager,
on his own responsibility, and partly, perhaps, as a tribute to the
cleanest and most self-respecting stoker he had ever fallen in with,
made out an order for the money demanded, cashed it, and Gaspard left
the office richer by a hundred francs.

The tide of luck was in full flood that morning, and he did nothing to
spoil it; as he passed along with the moving crowd, cafés called out to
him to come in and celebrate the occasion, but he passed them by; he
had no need of the help of alcohol; the bright light, the colours, the
movement around him, and the light-hearted, yet languorous atmosphere
of the gay city set all his southern nature aglow; just as blue eyes
are made bluer by blue attire, so the opal of the south in his mind
took brighter colours from the bright colours around it.

The insect had found a leaf similar to the leaf on which it was born.

Unconscious of the fact that he was marching straight upon his fate,
he passed along looking into the shops, strange shops without glass
fronts or names, black shadows under arched doorways, shadows shewing
merchandise and coloured people, shadows casting perfumes of flowers
and fruit, garlic scents.

He was crossing the little square where the diamond fountain jet was
dancing and singing in the sun, when he saw before him the figure of
a girl. She was coming along in the full blaze of light, a girl of
scarcely sixteen, tall, swift moving, and graceful as Atalanta, a
_porteuse_, bearing on her head a tray of some merchandise covered over
with a wasp-coloured scarf.

The load would have taxed a man, yet she bore it as easily as a
feather; she wore no shoes, and her striped robe was caught up at the
waist to give her limbs free play, shewing her leg almost to the knee.

She was of that strange race, whose blood has been mixed with the blood
of the Caribs, coloured like that Grecian statuary to which during a
thousand years the sun has lent some trace of his gold, till one can
imagine the sunlight lingering in the honey tints of the marble.

The blue black of her hair just shewed, covered with the turban of
striped material on which rested the tray.

As she came, walking erect and without a motion of the head, her dark
eyes glanced from side to side, and as she reached Gaspard her eyes met
his full, nor did they lower nor turn away till she had passed him.

He felt blinded as if by a flame. He turned. She was vanishing amidst
the crowd in the Rue Victor Hugo. He made a step as if to follow her,
then he stopped dead as though before a barrier.

The glance had only lasted a moment, yet in that moment, in a flash,
they had spoken one to the other. It was as though they had recognized
one another.

He could read a mysterious something in her glance, and it was as
though she had said, “Ah, there you are, from away beyond the beginning
of time!”

The fountain was playing in the sun and a hundred men and women were
meeting and passing each other in the little Place, but it was the
meeting and passing of coloured phantoms.

A man and a woman had just met and passed one another.

A miracle of life had taken place, the old, strange miracle forever
fresh, forever new. Yet nothing told of it, till, as he watched the
moving crowd into which she had vanished, suddenly, as if some belfry
in the sky had swung to life, came the clash and ripple of bells.

It was the _carillon_ of the cathedral that rang thrice daily. Golden,
joyous, sonorous; tenor and alto; beating the echoes to silver, waking
ghostly voices in the mornes and high woods, floating out over the blue
sea.




CHAPTER XVII

THE BELLS AND THE RAIN


It rains very often on the west of Martinique. The day is joyous,
brilliant, gaudy with the yellow of the city and the blue of sky and
sea. Pelée, with his turban of cloud, sits tranquilly in eternal
summer, then, as though at the pointing of some wizard’s wand, it
rains. Clouds overcast the blue, the thunder of the rain on roof and
verandah mixes with the rush of rivulet and runnel.

It was as though the bells had called the clouds. Suddenly the people
were scampering, the rain was lashing. Gaspard, who had sought the
shelter of a doorway, could hear the thunder of the verandahs all
along the Rue Victor Hugo, an arpeggio played by the fingers of the
rain. Wind had risen, and from above came the voice of the great trees
beating their wet green bands together, the sigh of the palmiste
bending to the wind, the whisper of tree ferns; from the street below
the Rue Victor Hugo came the fainter tune of rain-stricken verandah
and flowing runnel, laughter, voices calling one to another across the
dividing rain, the voices of children and, still, through it all, the
bells.

Rain, wind, tree sounds, perfumes of new wet foliage and earth,
spouting of the gouyave water, children’s voices, and through it all
the _carillon_ of the bells, sweet, joyous vibrant, like the voice of
the love that lives through darkness as through sunshine.

And now, look! A burst of blue above; the bells have broken a way to
heaven, a last thunder from the verandahs, like a parting salvo, and
the squall is making a rainbow over the blue sea.

It is over. The verandahs and shop doors are emptying, pretty faces are
turned up to the sky as if to test the truth of its blueness, and white
umbrellas are opening against the sun.

Gaspard leaving shelter set out to find the Rue du Morne.

His mind was still filled with the image of the girl, the girl with the
face of a beautiful child and the eyes of a woman, but the business he
was on soon drove her picture from his mind.

“Monsieur, can you direct me to the Rue du Morne?”

Monsieur, an old Creole gentleman under a white umbrella, can and does,
but his directions are given in the Creole _patois_, and so rapidly
that what he says seems one word. Gaspard making out that the Rue du
Morne lies somewhere below finds a side street leading downward to the
blue dream of the harbour.

One could almost tumble into the harbour from here, at least in
imagination. Never was there so steep a street, it is mostly steps,
foot-worn, moss-grown, murmurous with water, for the side runnels are
in spate after the rain.

“Madame, can you direct me to the Rue du Morne?”

In the street below an old Creole lady under a white umbrella, the
female replica of the old gentleman in the street above, replies to the
question volubly, and also seemingly in one word.

He gathers that it lies somewhere up above, but too lazy to climb he
pursues his way along the street which is a replica of the Rue Victor
Hugo. It is now getting towards the drowsy time of day. The streets are
emptying. He enquires his way as he goes and everyone is delighted to
direct him. Sometimes it seems the Rue du Morne lies above, sometimes
below; he comes to the conclusion that all these delightful people do
not know in the least what they are talking about. In another city he
would now be irritable, in St. Pierre he is only drowsy, mesmerised by
the hopeless search; it does not seem to matter a bit, he would just as
soon sleep under that coloured sky when it is filled with stars, as in
a room in the Rue du Morne, No. 3.

A banana-coloured baby eating a banana at a doorway draws his
attention, he is fond of children, and this thing, stark naked like a
honey-coloured cupid, attracts him.

He takes his hat off to it derisively.

“Monsieur, can you direct me to the Rue du Morne?”

It can, apparently, in a voice hoarse as a crow’s and with a thumb
pointed to the sky, then it vanishes into the house suspicious, maybe,
that it has been trapped into talking to a _Zombi_.

_Zombis_ are evil spirits, shapes, wizards. Now, in a little street,
steep as a stairway, dusky with house shadows, framing a glimpse of
blue sea, he asks the question for the last time of an old woman with a
patient, kindly face, who has come to her doorway for a breath of air.

“Yes, this is the Rue du Morne, and No. 3, this is it.”

She is Manman Faly.

They like each other at sight, and he explains what he wants, shews her
a handful of money, and follows her into the house.

She shews him into a room clean, but almost destitute of furniture.

In one corner is an “elephant,” not an animal, but a mattress two feet
thick.

It is the thing he has been yearning for. St. Pierre has seized him at
last, the drowsy languorous spirit has been leading him by the arm for
the last half hour, it leads him now to the mattress and tells him to
lie down. He does, and almost immediately falls asleep, whilst Man’m
Faly closes the door and leaves him to take her own siesta.

Towards the evening he wakes up, has some food, a drink at the bars by
the star-flashing harbour, returning sober and early to his room.

There is no glass to the window of his room—not a pane of glass in the
whole city, except maybe the coloured panes of the cathedral—and as
he lies fully awake before sleeping, he can hear through the slats of
the shutters, the voice of St. Pierre by night; the tune of a thousand
rivulets, fountains, water-pipes.

The whole city is held by sleep, yet it sings the whole night long,
answering the sea below, and the woods above.




CHAPTER XVIII

LOVE


In the south, at night, the trees are full of voices. Dare you sit in
the woods of Martinique at night you would hear in the green twilight
that the moon makes through the leaves, an orchestra louder and more
fantastic than ever filled a midsummer’s night’s dream.

Here in the daytime there is silence. One can hear the waterfall, the
distant river, the wind in the trees above, sounds that only serve to
make the background of silence more apparent.

At high noon, when the light is fullest, when the heat is greatest, and
the wind above stricken dead, the silence of the woods is terrific.

There is no silence in the whole world like to this, unless it be the
dumbness of a great multitude.

Around you on all sides life is rocketing and blazing; orchids,
hibiscus, bursts of bloom, ceibas, sand-box trees, air shoots of the
wild pine blossom and riot, uncanny because of their demonstrative life
in this silence.

But at dark all changes. Night rushes into the high woods like some mad
musician, conductor of an orchestra crazy as himself.

The blue day outside closes up swiftly like a great painted fan, just
like the pictures on a fan rapidly closed, St. Pierre tucks itself into
a pocket of shadow, the mornes and mountains are shrivelled up, Pelée
alone remains sun-stricken still, then he, too, vanishes in a crease
and as suddenly reappears; for the fan, flirted open again to its full
extent, shews the same picture, only this time it is lit by starlight
or the light of the moon.

It is with the first closing out of the light that the orchestra of
the woods begins; shrill, tremulous, like the bleating of a flock of
lilliputian goats, the voices of the _cabritt-bois_ and his mates fill
the shadows, then the moon strikes the green heart of the forest and it
springs alive like a rattle. A million fantastic things give tongue.
One might fancy forms to fit the insect noises of the northern woods,
but the wildest imagination pauses before the possibilities of this
tropical band, these drummers and harpers whose burr and rattle sways
and surges beneath the farandole of the fireflies.

At four o’clock, just as Pelée sights the coming sun, and the dawn is
coming over the sea like a lilac-coloured breeze, the _cabritt-bois_
ceases his bleating and Plong! the last harper plucks the final note
from his harp-string. The drummers put up their drums, the oboe, and
piccolo, the microscopic sax-horn player, the bones, and flute, pocket
or shoulders their instruments and depart—for dreamland maybe.

They have made music all night, music that has reached even the
dreamers of St. Pierre. The people asleep in the city become aware in
their sleep that something has ceased, the faint haze of sound from the
great wood above surrounds them no longer and they wake.

Gaspard awoke just as the wood music ceased. On the black floor of
the room the dawn through the slats of the shutter was laying seven
blue-grey bars upon the floor.

He had been dreaming of the island and of Sagesse. They had burst into
the treasure ship and the strand was strewn with bars of gold. Then he
lost Sagesse and was hunting for him and for Yves. It was full day, and
the island lay sweltering under the sun. He could see nothing of the
man he was in search of; then, far away at the end of the little coral
pier he saw a form that made him forget both Yves and Sagesse, the form
of a girl.

As he drew closer, he saw that it was the girl. The girl of the little
Place where the fountain played. The Place de la Fontaine as he called
it in his own mind, not knowing its real name.

She was standing with her tray balanced on her head as though she had
just landed, now she was laughing as she saw him coming towards her,
laughing as only the girls of Montpellier or Avignon can laugh and, as
he came along the ridge of coral he was laughing too, as he balanced
himself, fearful of falling. Then the ridge of coral became the yard of
a ship, the blue water below became distant, and the dream broke up.

Happy dream. He had almost forgotten her last night, chatting and
smoking with foreign sailors at the bar of a tavern. She must have
struck him hard to make him dream about her like that, for in the dream
it seemed to him he had known her a long time, that he was her declared
lover; this girl whom he had never seen before and whom he might never
meet again.

Now, a tap came to the door, and his landlady’s voice offered him
coffee or syrup. She brought the coffee in, and placed it on the floor
beside him and put the shutters aside, so that the window space became
a square dim disc of light, through which, with a breathing of wind,
came a tang from the sea below and a breath from the woods above.

St. Pierre was already astir; he could hear women’s voices and
the prattle of children, Creole street cries; unfamiliar voices,
scents, and sounds came through the open window space, awakening him
thoroughly, and awakening in him a keen sense of curiosity such as he
had never experienced in any other port.

The people here seemed different from the people anywhere else. Like
a child who, turning over the leaves of a dull book, comes upon a
surprising and joyously-coloured picture, he felt a pleasure he could
neither analyse nor understand. An educated man would have felt as he
felt, but cursed by convention and knowledge, and the catch words of
language, he would not have felt it so freshly as this child of the
south, who, like all the children of the south had some inborn love for
all that the true poets sing about and true artists paint.

Having dressed himself he left the house. Man’m Faly was nowhere to
be seen, and the Rue du Morne was steeped in curious twilight shewing
at its end an extraordinary vision of twilit sea, spreading out to
ghost-blue sea and out, away, and beyond the great mountain shadows, to
a sea of stainless azure.

He struck upwards to the street above, and then by a flight of steps
to the Rue Victor Hugo. The street was astir. _Blanchisseuses_ with
bundles making their way to the Rivière Roxelane, _calendeuses_ on
their way to their employment, shopkeepers, children, _porteuses_
balancing their loads upon their heads, starting on the long journeys
these women make daily over the island, all moving in the twilight of
very early dawn with, overhead, the hyacinth-blue sky of morning.

The great fan picture of starlit city, sea, and wood, had been snapped
to, and now the magic fan was slowly reopening to shew the same
picture sunlit. Pelée and the sea were already in view, and as Gaspard
made his way along the Rue Victor Hugo, the day bloomed brighter
overhead, dimness of hyacinths turning to the flashing of sapphires.
The air, though still surcharged with shadow, had in it now an obscure
brightness, a negative light that became positive where any bright
surface shewed, shadows were beginning to form, and the little fountain
in the Place de la Fontaine was returning from a dancing and whispering
ghost to the form of a dancing diamond flower.

He followed the street as it dipped and rose and dipped again to the
Rivière Roxelane. He was wondering in what house of all this strange
city, what street, was hidden the girl of yesterday.

He had taken his way along the Rue Victor Hugo and through the little
Place, perhaps because it was there he had met her; who knows; he was
quite unconscious of the manner in which she had taken hold upon him,
and, infecting him with that dark glance, had caused something to
stir and live in his blood; unconscious as the man who was yesterday
infected by malaria and to whom the first faint chill tells nothing of
the burning fever to follow.

He paused for a moment on the bridge and looked down at the ghost-dim
river raving along to the sea; the banks seemed strewn with snow, it
was the linen of the washerwomen, he could hear their voices above
the rushing of the river, and the sound they made beating the clothes
against the boulders.

Then he passed on and found himself in the market-place on the Place du
Fort.

Long before light, under the stars, boats from the fishing grounds had
been making for St. Pierre, laden with the catch of the night. From
Calebasse, Morne Rouge, Marigot, Vauclin, men and animals laden with
country produce had come into the city before dusk on the previous
evening.

Light was now striking through the trees of the market-place, the
stalls were set out and laden, boats had been dragged right up from
the shore on rollers, and their flashing cargoes were being unladen
right at the stalls, great fish still quivering and jumping with life,
an albicore, big almost as a shark, that took three men to lift, blue
fish, black fish, silver fish, fish that looked as though carefully
painted by hand, fish of all the forms that fish can possibly take, lay
exposed on the stalls or were being unladen from the boats.

When Gaspard entered the market the place was in shadow; flowers, fish,
fruit were there, merchants to sell them, and people to buy them, but
it was like a market-place in dreamland—a shadowy, yet living and
moving picture, almost voiceless—. Pelée is holding everything in his
mesmeric gloom.

       *       *       *       *       *